Academic year 2024/2025
Master's Degree (MSc) on BUILDING ENGINEERING
For more information visit http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=713
---------
Class of Master's Degree (MSc) on Construction engineering (LM-24)
Duration 2 years
Location PALERMO
Free access
Department of Engineering
Course Code 2027
---------
Educational objectives
The educational objective of the Degree Course is to train professionals with in-depth knowledge of the historical and technical-scientific aspects of building, of its implementation, rehabilitation and recuperation, to the specialist design, to the control of building economic and production cycle, identifying problems and finding appropriate design solutions, keeping pace with the innovative dynamics of the area, to improve the quality of building in its physical, technical, performance, economic and process aspects.
In particular, the course aims at training professional engineers capable of working autonomously and effectively in the following fields:
-  Design of complex building systems, with respect to the technological, structural, environmental quality aspects, and with a specific attention to wellbeing, service life and to issues related to energy, environmental impact and seismic safety;
-  recovery, rehabilitation, maintenance and management of existing buildings and of historical buildings;
-  Development of the construction process, with respect to the use of innovative materials and technologies;
-  Energetic sustainability of building processes and products;
-  Testing and quality control of products and works with respect also to the durability of materials for new buildings and for recuperation.
The training offered by the 2nd cycle Degree Course, focusing on integrated building design, structural and plant design, enables graduates of this course to easily fit in various building industry sectors
The number of credits for class-specific educational activities provides further competences in the following sectors:
-  Structural Design
Advanced study of structural analysis and design issues, through the in depth analysis of structures in reinforced concrete, pre-stressed concrete, steel, masonry with particular reference to the safety of the structures and to earthquake resistance issues.
-  Plant engineering
Explores the design of technical plants and of safety systems for buildings, with particular attention to energetic and environmental sustainability issues.
-  Building rehabilitation
Provides general and specific knowledge and the operational skills needed to tackle the building renovation sector in terms of building and structure design, of techniques and technologies as well as of the organization and management of interventions.
Specific issues will then be detailed under a disciplinary and instrumental point of view with respect to the survey and diagnostics of damage and deterioration as well as of the study of the evolution of edifices, building techniques and traditional and innovative used materials.
Existing laws will be then analysed, as well as the latest technologies for interventions and for testing the stability of buildings and inspecting yard works.
The first year of the educational programme consist of the advanced study of subjects related to structural issues (dynamics, complex structures in steel, reinforced concrete and pre-stressed reinforced concrete), technological, environmental and plant engineering issues (technical architecture and technological innovation, design of technical, technological and safety plants).
The second year is devoted to the preparation of building plans, with respect, in particular, to the recuperation of existing buildings, through the advanced study, under an integrated design point of view, of building issues (building design and building recuperation and conservation design), structural engineering issues (structural designs in seismic zones, structural problems of monuments and historical buildings), technological and energy issues (innovative materials and materials for rehabilitation, materials durability). The educational programme is completed by stages, internships, and the preparation of the degree dissertation.
---------
Professional opportunities
Profile:
Building Engineer
Functions:
The professionals trained by this Degree Courseare able to hold professional and managerial positions in the technical and administrative field in many work contexts, with specific skills in the following sectors:
1. building design, with reference to buildings in reinforced concrete, steel, mixed, masonry and with attention to aspects related to energy and seismic risk;
2. design and management of interventions on the existing buildings, starting from theidentification of materials degradation phenomena, from the processes of transformation and recovery of the built environment in respect of the historical and aesthetic value of the building and ensuring its structural safety against seismic actions;
3. design, production, implementation and management of construction processes, with specific reference to the structural, material, technological and plant engineering aspects and in general to project engineering.
Skills:
The professional activities of Building Engineers are related to the design, management, monitoring and technical-administrative control of:
1. operational methods and technical activities related to the identification, formulation and resolution of complex problems requiring an interdisciplinary approach and the adoption of innovative methods, thanks to the skills acquired in the four areas of knowledge identified within the degree course;
2. processes for acquiring the knowledge of historical and technical-scientific aspects of building systems, ability to elaborate the specialist aspects relating to the design and control of its economic and production cycle, with reference to both the construction of new buildings and the rehabilitation and recovery of the existing ones;
3. business organization with respect to the various professionals (systems, structures, architectural distribution designers, etc.) who operate in the intervention on existing building systems or in the construction of new ones.
Professional opportunities:
In addition to self-employment, graduates of this course will be able to take highly responsibity functions in public administrations, public and private bodies, construction and maintenance companies, companies producing materials and building components, professional firms and engineering and architecture companies. building heritage management companies, consultancy firms and service companies in the technology, safety, heat engineering and quality control sector.
---------
Final examination features
The final examination consists in the presentation and discussion of a thesis work, developed autonomously by the student. The thesis, developed under the guidance of a supervisor, must have original features, and may have an experimental, theoretical or design cut; it may also include a multimedia product and can be written in English. The thesis, or part of it, can also be carried out at other Italian and foreign institutions and public and/or private companies accredited by the University of Palermo.
The topics covered in the thesis are generally related to the profession of civil and environmental engineer - section A, or consist in an in-depth study of particular aspects of the design disciplines that characterize the master's degree course.
---------
