Academic year 2024/2025
Master's Degree (MSc) on ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
Curriculum: INDUSTRY AND GREEN MOBILITY
For more information visit http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=716
---------
Class of Master's Degree (MSc) on Electrical engineering (LM-28)
Duration 2 years
Location PALERMO
Free access
Department of Engineering
Double Degree with Politechnika Wroclawska - Wroclaw University of Technology –, Wroclaw (POLAND)
Course Code 2031
---------
Educational objectives
The course aims at training engineers with specific competences in the design, building and management of systems for the production, distribution and use of electric power, as well as of their components, in the relevant environmental, economic, regulatory and safety implications, and able to operate in all the industrial and service activities, (even not strictly electrical ones), where electric power is an important aspect and to interpret, describe, identify, formulate and solve, in innovative ways and with interdisciplinary approach too, complex problems as well as to ideate, plan, design and manage complex and/or innovative systems, processes, tests and services.
The educational programme, continuing the training provided in the 1st cycle degree course, contains advanced teachings broadening the concepts, content, methodology and planning methodology (with the help of advanced analytical and numerical techniques) in the typical electrical engineering sectors (Electrical Engineering, Electric power systems, Converters, Electric machines and activations, Electrical and electronic measurements), thanks also to the core and applicative support provided by teachings of other disciplinary areas (Numerical analysis, Electronics, Automation).
Curricular courses are integrated by seminars providing competences related to the business-economic culture, with respect in particular to specific applications and to professional ethics.
The received training enables graduates to access the labour market or to continue with higher educational programmes (university master courses, PhD courses).
The educational programme consists of frontal teachings, theoretical and laboratory practice, seminars, technical visits, stage and internships, with the help of teaching materials specified or provided by the teachers in hard copy or electronic format, and available on the Course website
---------
Professional opportunities
Consultant or employee in public and private companies and agencies in the field of production (even from renewable sources), transmission, distribution and (civil and industrial) use of electric power, of the electric power market and of electrical transportation systems.
Public and private companies, agencies, institutions in the service industry.
Self-employment: public and private companies, agencies and institutions providing services for the testing of devices, machines and plants, and for the testing and certification of compliance with regulations.
---------
Final examination features
It  consists both in the presentation of a thesis, written in an original way, aimed at ascertaining the technical-scientific and professional level of candidates,  and in the discussion of any questions posed by the members of the examining Board. The examination complies with the provisions set out in the relevant Regulations for the final examination of the Degree Course in Electrical Engineering LM-28 (issued with Rector's Decree no. 1842/2014, prot. 32587 of 9 May 2014), reported in Attachment 7 to the Course Educational Regulations, of which it is an integral part.
The final exam may also be related to an internship or training activity.
---------
