Academic year 2024/2025
Master's Degree (MSc) on MEDICINE AND SURGERY
Curriculum: MEDICINE AND SURGERY - CHIRONE, IPPOCRATE, HYPATIA
For more information visit http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=728
---------
Class of Master's Degree (MSc) on Medicine and surgery (LM-41)
Duration 6 years
Location PALERMO, CALTANISSETTA
Number of seats in national planning: 510
Department of Biomedicine, Neurosciences and Advanced Diagnostics
Course Code 2041
---------
Educational objectives
The single-cycle degree course consists of a total of 360 university credits (ECTS), spread over six years. Each credit corresponds to a student commitment of 25 hours, of which normally no more than 10 hours of frontal teaching. Each professional credit corresponds to 25 hours of work per student, of which at least 20 hours of professional educational activity, carried out in small groups at the educational facilities of the Degree Course or other structures of the territorial NHS in agreement.
Specific importance, as an integral and qualifying part of professional training, is held by the professionalizing training activity of internship prodromal to the achievement of the qualifying academic degree.
Within the 60 C.F.U. of professional training activity, 15 credits are envisaged intended for carrying out the three-month practical-evaluative internship referred to in article 3 of the decree of the Minister of Education, University and Research dated 9 May 2018, n. 58 and subsequent amendments, aimed at obtaining professional qualification. Each month of this internship consists of a number of hours corresponding to at least 5 credits. The internship is divided into the following periods, even if not consecutive: one month in the Surgical Area; one month in the Medical Area; one month, to be carried out during the sixth year of the course, in the specific field of General Medicine.
Each credit of the internship corresponds to at least 20 hours of professionalizing teaching activity and no more than 5 hours of individual study.
Pursuant to article 102, paragraph 1, of decree law no. 18/2020, the final exam of single-cycle degree of the LM-41 class in Medicine and Surgery has the value of a national qualification exam, after passing the practical evaluation internship, as per the decree of the Minister of Education, University and of the research 9 May 2018, n. 58.
Graduates of the class must achieve the skills required by the specific professional profile.
SPECIFIC MISSION OF THE SINGLE-CYCLE DEGREE COURSE.
The biomedical psycho-social mission of the single-cycle degree course aims at the real development of professional competence as well as of the values of professionalism. It is founded on the importance of integrating the biomedical paradigm of "treating the disease" with the psychosocial paradigm of "taking care of the human being" in the metaparadigm of the "complexity of care".
This specific mission aims therefore at training a doctor, at an initial professional level, providing:
• a multidisciplinary, interprofessional and integrated vision of the most common health and disease problems;
• an education oriented towards the prevention of disease and the promotion of health within the community and the territory;
• a deep knowledge of the new needs of care and health, cantered not only on the disease, but, above all, on the ill person, considered in his totality of soma and psyche and inserted in a specific social context;
THE SPECIFIC EDUCATIONAL PROJECT, THE TEACHING METHOD
The teaching method, useful for achieving the expected qualifying traits, provides for the horizontal and vertical integration of knowledge; it is a teaching method based on a solid cultural and methodological basis achieved in the study of pre-clinical disciplines and subsequently mainly focused on the ability to solve problems and make decisions, on the early contact with the patient, on the acquisition of good clinical skills combined with the ability to have a human relationship with the patient.
The teaching plan proposes the right balance of vertical and transversal integration among:
a) The basic sciences at large, including the knowledge of evolutionary biology, molecular biology and genetics and biological complexity aimed at understanding the structure and function of the human organism under normal conditions, for the purpose of maintaining the conditions of health and the correct application of translational scientific research;
b) Knowledge of morbid processes and the mechanisms that cause them, also in order to set up prevention, diagnosis and therapy;
c) Clinical and methodological medical practice, through the extensive use of tutorial-type teaching, capable of transforming theoretical knowledge into personal experience in order to build one's own scale of values and interests, and to provide the professional skills useful for knowing how to manage the complexity of medicine;
d) Human sciences, constituting a useful baggage to reach the awareness of being a doctor and of the profound values of the doctor's profession;
e) The acquisition of scientific, medical, clinical, and professional methodology aiming at individual and community health problems, with due attention to population and sex/gender differences.
A solid foundation of clinical knowledge is also ensured to the student through the organization of certified internships based on tutorial teaching, together with a strong understanding of the medical-scientific method and the human sciences. True professional competence, to be achieved after long contact with the patient, will be promoted from the first year, also through training in simulation, and integrated, throughout the course, with basic and clinical sciences through extensive use of tutored activities.
The expected learning outcomes are defined by integrating the European Descriptors (5 Dublin descriptors) with the proposal of the Institute for International Medical Education (IIME), Task Force for Assessment, and by “The TUNING Project (Medicine) – Learning Outcomes/ Competences for Undergraduate Medical Education in Europe”.
The learning objectives for the Single Cycle Degree Courses in Medicine and Surgery are attributed to the different methodological skills envisaged by the DM 16/03/2007, art. 3 paragraph 7 required for this Graduate. The objectives are also consistent with what is indicated by the "Core curriculum for the Degree in Medicine and Surgery" proposed by the Permanent Conference of the Presidents of the Italian Degree Courses in Medicine.
---------
Professional opportunities
Profile:
Medical Doctor
Functions:
•	Treatment of the most common and widespread dysfunctions, diseases and injuries in the population; 
•	implementation of measures for the early detection of serious diseases in patients at risk; 
•	prescription of drugs and non-pharmacological therapies, clinical tests for diagnosis, hospital admissions and specialist examinations; 
•	follow-up of the course of diseases and related treatments; 
•	promotion and implementation of prevention actions towards patients or in the organizations.
Skills:
General practitioner
replacement of general practitioners
emergency medical Service
health officer
Professional opportunities:
Graduates in medicine and surgery may find professional opportunities in:
Universities and Research Centres;
Hospitals and Specialist Centres of the National Healthcare System;
Public and private clinics
National and international healthcare and humanitarian organizations.
The single-cycle degree is also a requirement for admission to medical graduate schools.
---------
Final examination features
To be admitted to the final examination, students must have acquired, all the credits related to the teachings of the educational programme, except the credits assigned to the final examination, which will be acquired with the latter. 
The final examination consists of both in the presentation of a thesis, written in an original way, aiming at ascertaining the level of scientific, technical and professional competence achieved, and in the discussion of possible questions posed by members of the Board. 
The final mark, expressed out of 110, is determined by the average of the marks obtained in the teachings examinations, the assessment of the discussed dissertation, and the assessment of any other activities, in the manner established by the Board of the Degree Course.
---------
