Academic year 2024/2025
Master's Degree (MSc) on BUSINESS ECONOMIC SCIENCES
Curriculum: ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND MANAGEMENT
For more information visit http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=733
---------
Class of Master's Degree (MSc) on Management (LM-77)
Duration 2 years
Location PALERMO
Free access
Department of Economics and statistical Sciences
Double Degree with University of Dubrovnik, Dubrovnik (CROATIA)
Course Code 2064
---------
Educational objectives
Graduates will acquire:
1.  Scientific methods and contents in the business, economic, mathematical-statistic and juridical ambits which are needed for an advanced knowledge of all types of companies, according to a dynamic interaction among their respective existence conditions, form start-up to closing down and the ordinary and extraordinary functioning;
2.  The needed advanced business-economic knowledge which is applicable to all business macro-classes (private, public and nonprofit) and to the most diffused sector classes (industry, commerce, services and public administration), dimension classes (small, medium, large), technology classes (backward, mature, advanced) etc... with an overall orientation towards change and development according to international and multi-cultural perspectives;
3.  The professional competences for employment and self-employment, in the administration macro-areas related to organisation, management, study and governance, as well as in the respective functional sub-areas, with an overall orientation towards higher qualification positions and managerial and strategic responsibilities;
4.  Written and spoken command of at least one European Union language,. Besides Italian, with respect also to subject-related vocabularies.
Class educational objectives, as well as the specific course objectives drive the educational programme towards advanced knowledge (also useful for further higher education programmes, such as 2nd level University Master Courses, Doctoral Programmes and lifelong learning) as well as to adequate competences for high job positions, through the continuous monitoring of quality and the constant interaction with the most important social and institutional interest.
In addition, due to the extreme versatility of current corporate issues and the variety of possible job opportunities, it's necessary to provide highly articulated educational programmes, to better develop the sub-functional areas of administrative macro-areas. 
With this background, the degree course, unique in its class, achieves the maximum allowed constancy for educational activities in non- business ambits and, conversely, the highest possible differentiation for the activities related to the business sector. The course might provide different curricula and educational packages with respect to some fundamental strands of knowledge and skills which are currently particularly important, such as, for instance, corporate systems governance, business communication and management of companies.
In accordance with the limit of 12 examinations, including the final one, teachings are rather compact, and are awarded with 6, 8, or 10 credits. Some teachings awarded with 10 credits might be divided in modules of at least 4 credits each.
Educational activities are provided in two semesters per academic year and, in accordance with the “technical” limits imposed by law, the first year it provides an equitable distribution of the various training activities to areas, scientific sectors and credits, with several choices by students between predetermined possibilities. In the second year, however, there is a strong pre-eminence of the business economics educational activities and credits, elective activities, and the final examination.
---------
Professional opportunities
Further studies, namely towards a career in secondary school and high school teaching, 2nd cycle university master courses, lifelong learning, PhD courses and research activities at large.
Employment, up to the higher levels of the hierarchy, in the classes of companies of all legal nature (private or public), productive sector of goods and services  (primary, secondary, tertiary, more or less advanced), dimension (small, medium or large), territorial dimension (local, delocalized, transnational, etc..), technology used (backward, mature or advanced), etc.. or in private institutions (assistance, representation, protection and the like), public institutions (planning, coordination, control and the like) that deal with the above classes of companies. 
Self-employment, up to the higher forms of more or less continuous and coordinated collaboration, individual or associated consulting and practice of the following regulated professionsy: 1) Certified Public Accountants and Auditors (Sections A and B of Chartered accountants and Auditors), after training and national qualification examination according to the current legislation or ex "Framework Convention" between the Ministry of Education university and Research (MIUR) and the National Council of the said Order; 2) Labour Consultants, after at least two years practical experience and national qualification examination.
---------
Final examination features
The final examination is centred on issues related to the educational objectives and aims at enabling the formulation of an overall evaluation of the acquired knowledge and mastery of competences and of the learning outcomes in accordance with European standards.
It consists of the preparation, presentation and discussion of an original dissertation written under the guidance of one or  two supervisors and is related to doctrinal studies or to the results of applied or experimental research in one or more course subjects.
---------
