Academic year 2024/2025
Bachelor's Degree (BSc) on AGRICULTURAL ENGINEERING
Curriculum: AGRO-ENGINEERING
For more information visit http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=541
---------
Class of Bachelor's Degree (BSc) on Agriculture and Forestry (L-25)
Duration 3 years
Location PALERMO
Free access
Department of Agricultural, Food and Forestry Science
Course Code 2073
---------
Educational objectives
The Degree course in agricultural engineering provides core competences in the field of agricultural production, of agricultural land surveying techniques, as well as of the main analysis, implementation and management techniques for agricultural businesses.
Graduates of this course should acquire basic knowledge in propaedeutic subjects such as mathematics, physics, chemistry, plant animal biology, needed to understand the basics of specific professional subjects. This knowledge enables graduate to achieve professional competences including the principles of agronomics, cartography and land survey, rural buildings and animal productions. 
Graduates will also acquire the competences they need to solve some applicative issues of the agricultural sector, enabling them to carry out technical assistance activities. Graduates will also acquire the knowledge and operational skills needed to carry out land valuation and design of business plants and works. Graduates will, in particular, be able to design small irrigation networks and drainage works at the service of the farm.
Graduates in Agricultural Engineering will acquire, through the attendance to specific professional laboratories, the ability to interact with other professionals of agriculture and to work in teams.
The acquired competences enable graduates to face and solve, as junior professionals, the following issues:
• First-level consultancy and design activities relating to the manufactures of farms, irrigation and drainage systems, greenhouses, stables, rural buildings and roads;
• Choice of machines and plants for soil and plant management, also through precision techniques;
•	Management of the soil-plant system for production;
• Drafting of projects aimed at the provision of contributions for landscaping works on farms;
• Implementation of the programs offered by the European Union for the use of Community economic resources for rural areas.
The duration of this course is three academic years. 
To obtain the degree, students should have acquired 180 credits, including the ones related to the knowledge of a European language, besides Italian, subject to the special rules for the protection of linguistic minorities. The educational programme entails 19 mandatory examinations (7-9 credits each), a language test, a practice period in associated facilities and the final examination on course-specific issues.
As for mandatory teachings, a least 25% of frontal teaching must consist of laboratory activity, practice, field activities
The course is completed with 12 credits freely chosen by the student, consistently with the educational plan, which can be acquired, in accordance with art.10, paragraph 5, letter a) of D.M. 270/04, choosing among the activities and subjects provided by other degree courses at the University of Palermo or other associated Italian and Foreign Universities. Students must also acquire up to 3 CFUs for professionalising activities, useful to find employment opportunities (art.10, paragraph 10, letter d) of D.M. 270/04)
At the end of the course, students obtain the title of “Dottore in Agroingegneria” and, after passing the professional qualification examination, they may register in Section B (Dottore Agronomo Junior) of the professional register.
---------
Professional opportunities
Profile:
Farm technician
Functions:
The farm technician is a junior expert who carries out advisory, even legal, and planning activities in farms and implements the programs offered by the European Union. He/she may enrol in Section B of the Professional Register of Agronomist and Forestry Doctors.
Skills:
- activities of consulting and product design;
- technical advice to the Judicial Authority on issues related to the agricultural land;
Career opportunities:
Private practice in Farms, Professional offices, Public Administration.
Profile:
Technical planner of community programs
Functions:
These technicians are junior experts who carry out planning activities in farms, professional offices and public administration, implementing the programs offered by the European Union. They are enrolled in Section B of the Professional Register of Agronomist and Forestry Doctors.
Skills:
- Project analysis and access to funding for contributions for farms land improvement;
 - implementation of programs offered by the European Union and use of Community economic resources in the agricultural sector
Career opportunities:
Private practice as junior agronomist, after passing the National qualification exam;
Advisory activities;
Employment in  Public Administrations and Private Companies
---------
Final examination features
To obtain the degree, students must have acquired 180 credits including those relating to the final examination (3 credits). The final test has the objective of assessing the level of maturity and critical skills of the undergraduate, with respect to learning and to the acquired knowledge, on completion of the activities provided by the course syllabus. The final examination consists of a written or oral test, in accordance with the rules fixed every year by the Degree Course Regulations for the final examination, respecting and consistent to the calendar, the ministerial requirements and to the relevant Guidelines of the University.
---------
