Academic year 2024/2025
Bachelor's Degree (BSc) on MATHEMATICS
For more information visit http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=552
---------
Class of Bachelor's Degree (BSc) on Mathematics (L-35)
Duration 3 years
Location PALERMO
Free access
Department of Mathematics and Informatics
Course Code 2102
---------
Educational objectives
The degree course aims at providing graduates with solid groundings in the various sectors of mathematics, with respect not only to the technical aspects of the discipline, but also to the cultural ones, and with familiarity with the scientific method.
The educational programme, while based on a large part common to all students , allows them to choose curricula providing good preparation for further study in 2nd cycle degrees in Mathematics or in other disciplines as well as for their entrance into the labour market. The curriculum is characterized by the training in fundamental mathematics as well as with a good grounding in Physics and Computer Science.
The course duration is three years and each year is divided into semesters. The first and second year provide the basic knowledge of Algebra, Geometry, Mathematical Analysis, Mathematical Physics, Foundations of Mathematics , Physics and Informatics as well. The third year is devoted to the completion of knowledge in the various fields of mathematics through a wide range of class-specific, related and integrative educational credits, aiming at providing competencies both in theoretical and in strategic areas for the applications of mathematics, such as computer science, physics, biology, chemistry, economics and engineering. The course is completed by an introduction to Probability Theory and Numerical Analysis. Elective activities and final examination take place during the third year.
---------
Professional opportunities
Profile:
1st cycle graduate in Mathematics
Functions:
Qualified support in the IT, modeling and economic-financial areas.
Skills:
- Computational and computer skills;
-Management, analysis and processing of numerical data;
- Support activities in the mathematical modeling and numerical treatment of data, as well as in IT;
-Diffusion of scientific culture.
Professional opportunities:
Graduates may:
(a) Continue their studies in a master's degree. The direct access one is the LM-40 (Mathematics).
Furthermore, they will be able to carry out professional activities:
(b) in business and manufacturing companies;
(c) in the economic-financial context;
(d) in laboratories and research centers;
(e) in the field of dissemination of scientific culture;
(f) in the services sector;
(g) in the public administration.
---------
Final examination features
To obtain the degree, students must have acquired 180 credits including those relating to the final examination (3credits). The final test aims assessing the level of maturity and critical skills of the undergraduate, with respect to learning and to the acquired knowledge, on completion of the activities provided by the course syllabus. The final examination consists of a written or oral test, in accordance with the rules fixed every year by the Degree Course Regulations for the final examination, respecting and consistent to the calendar, the ministerial requirements and to the relevant Guidelines of the University.
---------
