Academic year 2024/2025
Bachelor's Degree (BSc) on BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES
For more information visit http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=520
---------
Class of Bachelor's Degree (BSc) on Biology (L-13)
Duration 3 years
Location PALERMO
Number of seats in local planning: 327
Department of Biological, Chemical and Pharmaceutical Sciences and Technologies
Double Degree with UNIVERSITE D'ARTOIS, Arras (FRANCE)
Course Code 2108
---------
Educational objectives
The 1st cycle degree course in Biological Sciences aims at providing sound grounding in the main areas of biology and command of the methods and technologies related to the respective scientific research areas providing adequate training for understanding scientific and technological progress and to know and deal with living beings. The degree course is designed in accordance with the national guidelines approved by the Board of Biologists of Italian Universities (CBUI), and it therefore is to be counted among the "certified quality" degree course with respect to professional opportunities as well as to further studies. The course provides for homogeneous and coherent training to all graduates, with respect to the typical educational objectives and core competences, for direct professional opportunities as well as for further 2nd cycle degree courses. To facilitate further studies, the course is aimed at providing undergraduates with a sound cultural methodological grounding through a solid training in the major fields of biology and of the methodologies and technologies for biological research, by providing them with the training and tools needed to assimilate the scientific and technological progress and to deal with a more advanced level of detail with methodological and cultural issues related to Life Sciences. To provide a character of preparation, not only for the continuation of studies, but also to direct access to the labour market and to the profession, the path includes both the development of internships at university departments and public or private agencies with high qualification in specific training periods in public or private institutions, for enriching the educational programme and aiming at the acquisition of operational and applicative skills which are immediately expendable in the labour market. Students will be able to choose between training activities aimed at: - activities in the field of laboratory of clinical analysis, of tissue typing, genetics and cytogenetics, oncology, cyto-toxicological and eco-toxicological analysis, water and food hygiene, identification of pathogens of humans, animals or plants; - The conservation and management of the marine environment, monitoring of the benthic and flora and fauna settlement, monitoring of marine ecosystems; - conservation of biodiversity, plant taxonomy and phytognosis, plant and zoogeography. To achieve the learning outcomes the three-year course includes the development of disciplines awarding a variable number of credits (ranging from a minimum of 6 to a maximum of 12, for a total of examinations, including the ones relating to the acquisition of 12 credits for elective activities, not greater than 20. The programme also includes training activities in university and external laboratories for not less than 20 credits. Within the elective activities (12 credits) helpful tips will be given in order to increase the educational content useful for the completion of the formation of biologist. The course, divided into semesters, will be held in a way to allow the student to gradually acquire the theoretical and operational tools for the understanding of biological phenomena. In the first year a good portion of the credits will be allocated to the scientific areas of mathematics, chemistry and physics, the knowledge of which is preliminary to the acquisition of strictly biological competences. At the same time the course provides the biological knowledge which is considered the basis to the approach to the study of cells and organisms, including humans. In the second and third year the acquisition of biological expertise will be completed, including the study of plant and animal organisms, micro-organisms, as well as of mechanisms of reproduction and development, with an interdisciplinary morphological, physiological, biochemical, molecular, genetic, evolutionary, eco - environmental approach. In addition to theoretical skills, students will be able to acquire adequate operational elements due to the attendance of laboratories and/or exercises implemented through a mandatory internship period at the University or in public administration facilities and laboratories affiliated with the University, during the final year of the course. Assessment will be carried out mainly through written and/or oral exams, within the threshold values set by the DM 270. Upon completion of the studies, students will be awarded a 1st cycle degree in Biology , class L -13. Graduates of this course will have access to 2nd cycle degree courses of the class LM- 6 " Biology " and of other allied classes; they may also complete their studies with a University Master degree or with a short post-graduate course. A graduate in Biological Sciences will always have the opportunity to enter the labour market and the profession, as it is specifically prescribed the enrolment in the National Order of Biologists B (junior Biologist) after passing the national qualification examination. The professional activity of members in Section B, in accordance with and for the purposes referred to in Article 1, paragraph 2, remaining unchanged reserves and allocations already established by current legislation, consists of the activities that involve the use of standardised methodologies, such as running with professional technical autonomy : a) analytical and instrumental procedures linked to biological investigations; b ) technical and analytical procedures in the field of biotechnology, molecular biology, biomedicine also aimed at research; c) technical-analytical and control procedures in the environmental field and in the and hygiene of water, air, soil and food; d) technical and analytical procedures in the field of physical-chemical, biochemical, microbiological, toxicological, pharmacological and genetic engineering; e) procedures for quality control. In accordance with European harmonisation principles, learning outcomes respond to the specific requirements of the national Tuning Table (Board of Biologists of Italian Universities (CBUI) for class L-13.
---------
Professional opportunities
Profile:
Junior Biologist 
Function:
Biologist
Junior biologists can carry out technical activities independently or in companies/laboratories. They can carry out their activity as technicians in the analysis laboratories in the agro-food, environmental, research, pharmaceutical industry, quality control sectors.
Skills:
The skills acquired during the course enable them to perform technical-operational tasks and professional support activities in the following application areas: environmental, bio-health, food, nutrition, industrial, pharmaceutical, scientific information, etc., as well as in basic and applied research in public and private institutions.
Professional Opportunities:
Graduates obtain, through the national exam the qualification to carry out professional support activities (junior biologist) pursuant to Presidential Decree 328/01, with respect to the technical-analytical, production and quality control procedures related to biological investigations. In addition, the Degree Course provides a broad spectrum of training bases necessary for admission to the 2nd cycle degrees in class LM-6 (Biology) and similar.
---------
Final examination features
To obtain the degree in Biological Sciences, students must have acquired 180 credits including those relating to the final examination (3 credits). The final test has the objective of assessing the level of maturity and critical skills of the undergraduate, with respect to learning and to the acquired knowledge, on completion of the activities provided by the course syllabus. The final examination consists of an oral test, in accordance with the rules fixed every year by the Degree Course Regulations for the final examination, respecting and consistent to the calendar, the ministerial requirements and to the relevant Guidelines of the University.
---------
