Academic year 2024/2025
Master's Degree (MSc) on COMPLEX ADMINISTRATIONS AND ORGANIZATIONS SCIENCE
Curriculum: COMPLIANCE, BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT AND CRIME PREVENTION
For more information visit http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=771
---------
Class of Master's Degree (MSc) on Public Administration (LM-63)
Duration 2 years
Location PALERMO
Free access
Department of Political Sciences and International Relations
Course Code 2163
---------
Educational objectives
The degree course aims at providing the advanced level of knowledge and multidisciplinary methodological skills in the socio-political institutional, economic, legal, managerial, engineering, agricultural and health subjects which are adequate for the training of professionals with high level skills in the planning, organization and business development of qualified public and private services, in particular in the fields of business administration and management, work organization and human resources, security, prevention, defence and social control, as well as trade union and sustainability policies. The course therefore aims at training senior management of Public Administration bodies, companies, and private SMEs as well as professionals and managers who act in the field and can relate to and to mediate with the public administration as well as with privates. 
Graduates will also be able to operate at a high level within the public and private administration according to the principles of legality and impartiality. They must be able to promote and implement activities and initiatives of public and private intervention through the proper functioning of administrations and improving the quality of services aimed at economic and social development of the territory at regional and local level, but also within a European and international perspective, according to criteria of effectiveness, efficiency, and economy. The knowledge gained will enable graduates of the course to interpret, plan, manage the processes of change taking place in public administrations and in the services and resources organizations. 
The program provides the methodological skills to design and implement performance management in collaborative contexts and to develop a new professional profile capable of systemically combining sustainability with the elements of "process" and "responsibility" in the creation of collaborative platforms. These professionals possess the skills of learning facilitators in the construction of group models as well as of specialists in performance management.
Students can combine basic studies on public administration with a specific focus on outcome-oriented performance management, applied to a variety of innovative fields, including urban governance, circular economy, governance of local areas, urban regeneration and socio-economic, cultural and ecological transition.
The program places particular emphasis on the crucial role of collaboration among different stakeholders as a driving force for the formulation and implementation of innovative policies supporting the holistic governance of sustainability. The principles of the so-called quintuple helix, which imply the involvement of academia, industry, government, media, civil society and other stakeholders operating in the field of ecology, constitute the founding basis of the educational approach adopted here. This integrated perspective reflects the awareness of the complexity of the challenges related to sustainability and emphasizes the power of collaboration between the different stakeholders in shaping robust and innovative policies. The mission of the program is to train its graduates not only as individuals competent in the specific disciplines addressed through the discussion of empirical cases and field projects with the stakeholders involved, but also as agents of change capable of leading collaborative and innovative processes for the common good. To achieve these objectives, the degree program is organized with specific teachings providing the acquisition of specialized skills in relevant sectors of administration as well as a critical, comparative and practical in-depth analysis of the issues related to administration in the public and private sectors. In particular, the course includes teachings such as computer science, political economy, emerging governance models, criminal law of public administration, general and economic sociology, labour law, sustainable mobility, urban governance, circular economy, governance of local areas and urban regeneration.
During the first year, students acquire legal, business and collaborative governance knowledge, constituting the conceptual framework within which the other knowledge will be modulated respectively in the field of criminological research, sociology of business, economics of compliance, but also of socio-economic, cultural and ecological transition.
The course is based on an interdisciplinary approach that aims to develop research-intervention skills providing an "interpretation key" on the cause-effect links underlying the results referable to an organizational and inter-organizational dimension within a context, with reference to complex systems such as socio-economic, cultural and ecological ones. Some examples are migratory flows, climate change, terrorism, market globalization, population aging, crime prevention and control, quality of life in metropolitan urban areas and suburbs, health and sports, sustainable nutrition, pollution, natural disasters and social marginalization.
This knowledge is further strengthened during the second year, during which students acquire the main tools for the prevention and management of risk in public and private organizations, also in terms of workplace safety, privacy of environmental cases, as well as innovative policies to support the holistic management of sustainability. The second semester of the final year will be dedicated to external training activities and internships at national or foreign companies, public and/or private bodies, public and private organizations, on the basis of University agreements and with the interested professional bodies and organizations. In this perspective, collaboration with local and national public bodies and organizations, companies and businesses in the sector, both at local and national level, should be emphasized, also for the purpose of identifying specific training programs. The educational programme, aiming at enabling students to apply, refine and further develop the knowledge acquired, culminates in the elaboration and discussion of an original written thesis carried out under the guidance of a supervisor, one of the professors of the Degree Course, at the conclusion of a guided path of planning or research or case analysis, which may also refer to the activity carried out during the internships, showing the undergraduates ability to operate autonomously and a good level of communication. Graduates of this Course must also be able to use, in written and oral form, at least one of the reference languages of the European Union, with respect, namely to disciplinary lexicons (for these purposes, the use of manuals, texts, documents and materials in a foreign language is also foreseen in the teachings). These language skills are also an access requirements: in particular it is necessary to have a knowledge of the English language of at least B2 level
---------
Professional opportunities
Profile:
Compliance expert and compliance officer in public and private organizations. Experts in performance management and governance, with a primary focus on measuring and evaluating the outcomes of policies in the area of sustainability
Functions:
Governance of integrated processes of public and private organizations in order to promote and implement complex forms of compliance also in the context of innovation of management control and development strategies of reference organizations; management, control, evaluation and activation of relational dynamics and adoption of decisions in a complex context; planning and management of change processes underway in public, private and non-profit administrations in order to achieve resilience with respect to "wicked" problems.
More specifically, the professional profiles will be able to (a) fit into the decision-making context of public and private organizations, providing input and knowledge in the management of organizational, financial and human resources; (b) implement the practical aspects of the management of the administration's organizational, financial and human resources - also by developing organizational change programs - in order to improve performance levels at the individual, group, organizational and community levels; (c) govern the implementation processes of the organizational, management and control models ex. Legislative Decree 231/01; (d) manage the tax risk that public and private organizations face, both at an international and domestic level; e) be in charge of organizational units of private companies operating in the innovative and strategic sectors of sustainable development; f) manage performance and governance and System Dynamics methods to improve outcome-oriented governance in collaborative governance contexts; g) analyse performance management systems and facilitate strategic planning and learning processes, also within local development agencies; h) strategically plan human resources.
Skills:
Ability to manage, control, evaluate, activate relational dynamics, and to make decisions in a complex context. High-level management of reference organizations; external global consultancy for public and private organizations.
Skills in legal-criminal, administrative, fiscal, organizational-managerial, psychosocial and business matters.
Professional opportunities:
New professional profile of compliance expert for the management of corporate risks of public and private organizations on the multiple administrative, criminal, fiscal and civil fronts.
Senior officials of state administrations and public bodies.
Senior officials of the banking and insurance sectors.
Managers of organizational units of private companies operating in innovative and strategic sectors of economic development.
Individuals with the skills to access managerial careers in Public Administrations.
Manager of organizational units of private companies operating in innovative and strategic sectors of sustainable development.
Specialist in performance management and governance.
Expert in System Dynamics to improve outcome-oriented governance in collaborative governance contexts.
Analyst of performance management systems.
Facilitator in strategic planning and learning processes, also within local development agencies.
Chartered accountant specializing in the development of ESG strategies, RISK
MANAGEMENT, STRATEGIC GOVERNANCE AND PROGRAMMING.
Expert in strategic planning of human resources.
Profile:
Top officials and consultants operating in strategic sectors of public and private organizations
Functions:
High-level collaboration within management structures of reference organizations; participation in the development of government programs in collaboration with top management.
The acquisition of skills in legal-criminal, administrative, organizational-managerial, psychosocial and business matters enables graduates to enter professionally in the business consultancy sector with particular reference to: (a) the development and implementation of organizational, management and control models pursuant to Legislative Decree 231/01; (b) providing technical support to the judicial administrations of assets and companies seized and confiscated from organized crime.
Furthermore, graduates will be able to collaborate with the managers of the Company Management to: (c) suggest strategies to evaluate the quality of strategic decisions regarding the management of organizational, financial and human resources; (d) collaborate in order to identify effective management practices of organizational, financial and human resources for the development of organizational change programs; (e) provide advice on organizational, financial and human resources management practices, in order to improve performance at a group, organizational and community level of analysis; (f) develop the flexibility needed to succeed in local, national, supranational and global organizations, such as large consulting firms, strategic planning departments of companies, public administrations or NGOs; (g) interpret, plan, manage the change processes underway in public, private and non-profit administrations aimed at pursuing resilience with respect to "wicked" problems.
Skills:
The main skills are of legal (knowledge of EU and national regulations aimed at administrative management), political (for skills in the analysis and evaluation of administrative policies), sociological (for understanding the needs and new models of society) and economic nature (for the sustainability dimension in the context of a general contraction of available resources).
Skills in legal-criminal, administrative, organizational-managerial, psychosocial and business matters.
Professional opportunities:
National and local government administrations, private and non-profit companies.
---------
Final examination features
The final examination consists of the and discussion of an original written dissertation, prepared under the guidance of a supervisor chosen among the professors of the Faculty, at the end of a guided path of planning, research or case study.
---------
