Academic year 2024/2025
Bachelor's Degree (BSc) on PHYSIOTHERAPY (QUALIFYING FOR PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE)
Curriculum: PHYSIOTHERAPY (QUALIFYING FOR THE PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE)
For more information visit http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=751
---------
Class of Bachelor's Degree (BSc) on Health professions for rehabilitation (L/SNT2)
Duration 3 years
Location PALERMO
Number of seats in national planning: 35
Department of Biomedicine, Neurosciences and Advanced Diagnostics
Course Code 2170
---------
Educational objectives
This degree course specifically aims at the scientific-professional training of graduates, qualified physiotherapists, and this objective is achieved through theoretical and practical learning aimed at the specificity of the profession according to the contents of Ministerial Decree no. 741/1994 which identifies and regulates the professional profile of the Physiotherapist and through the learning of the disciplines founding the international cultural fields as provided for in the Core Curriculum of the Physiotherapist (see 2008 and subsequent modifications and integrations), such as:
-  Biomolecular science.
-  Morphological science.
-  Physics.
-  Psycho-pedagogic science.
-  Rehabilitation methodology.
-  General pathology and pharmacology
-  Principles and methods of neuro-rehabilitation.
-  Internal and geriatric medicine.
-  Locomotor system rehabilitation.
-  Management.
-  Physiotherapeutic rehabilitation in specialist medicine.
-  Physiotherapeutic rehabilitation in paediatrics.
-  Diagnostics and prevention in healthcare services.
-  General surgery, first aid and emergency.
In the formulation of the Project, the priority is represented by the theoretical/practical study of the Science of Physiotherapy, which is implemented through lectures, exercises, educational laboratories as well as professionalizing Internship in the sectors qualifying Physiotherapy, such as the rehabilitation of the musculoskeletal, neuromotor, cardio-respiratory and visceral systems, in all age groups.
The competence and relational skills necessary to interact with patients, caregivers and the professional system are developed through the teachings in human and psycho-pedagogical sciences aimed at providing those behaviours and attitudes, necessary and fundamental to relate to the person.
The basic activities provide a general preparation in view of an application in the physiotherapy-rehabilitation field. Basic disciplines are specifically related to the knowledge of human anatomy, the physiology of movement systems and other disciplines are related to movement systems, also in the physio-pathological field. Furthermore, basic knowledge for the approach to emergencies and first aid is provided.
As for class-specific activities, teachings in the physiotherapy area are provided as well as teachings of medical and surgical pathology of physiotherapy interest (neurology, orthopaedics, cardiovascular system diseases, etc.). Furthermore, managerial and public health teachings are provided (prevention, application of Law 626 relating to risks in the healthcare environment), as well as practical knowledge in general imaging diagnostics.
The so-called 'other training activities' aim to deepen and develop specific knowledge in the specialized field of Physiotherapy Science.
The aim is also to enable student to use the most common software dedicated to bibliographic research, as well as to understand and interpret scientific literature, with a view to professional development.
The activities related to professional laboratories of the specific SSD (MED/48) aim at providing the skills for:
-	 the functional physiotherapy assessment of the patient, with particular reference to the independent use of assessment scales, specific tests and other tools suitable for the relative compilation of physiotherapy records
-	the definition and construction of the physiotherapy-rehabilitation program
-	independently practicing activities for the functional re-education of motor, psychomotor and cognitive disabilities using physical, manual, massage and occupational therapies
-	the identification of the most useful aids or environmental adaptations to promote maximum autonomy of the person and his quality of life, proposing the use of prostheses and aids, training in their use and verifying their effectiveness
-	the assessment of the rehabilitation methodology according to the functional recovery objectives. 
In reference to the practical application of all means of physical therapy with the use of electromedical devices, students must be able to recognize any unwanted effects/damage on the person caused by inadequate use or improper application.
Note: The SSD MED/48 is intended for Teachers in possession of the Professional Qualification of Physiotherapist or equivalent qualification.
---------
Professional opportunities
Profile:
Physiotherapist
Functions:
Physiotherapists carry out their function autonomously or in collaboration with other healthcare professionals; they implement prevention, treatment and rehabilitation interventions in the areas of motorial skills, higher cortical functions and visceral functions resulting from pathological events of various congenital or acquired aetiologies. They elaborate, also in a multidisciplinary team, the definition of the rehabilitation program, after functional assessment, aimed at identifying and overcoming the disabled person's health needs; independently practicing therapeutic activities for the functional re-education of motor, psychomotor and cognitive disabilities using physical, manual, massage and occupational therapies; they propose the adoption of prostheses and aids, train patients in their use and verify their effectiveness; they verify the correspondence of the rehabilitation methodology implemented to the functional recovery objectives.
Skills:
Skills in the Prevention Area:
To identify the health and prevention needs of disability.
To promote the actions necessary to maintain health and better interact with the environment of the person with a disability.
To prevent further worsening of the disability.
Skills in the Care and Rehabilitation Area:
To identify the needs of the person and the community in reference to the physical, psychological and social sphere, susceptible to functional recovery.
To collect data relating to the physiological and pathological history of the patient, to structures, functions, activities, participation and personal and environmental factors.
To analyse and process the data collected to determine the abilities, functional capacities and potential outcomes (results), respecting the choices of the user and/or family caregivers.
To formulate the physiotherapy diagnosis based on the evaluation of the data collected according to the ICF classification model.
To formulate the physiotherapy prognosis based on the physiotherapy diagnosis.
To facilitate patient involvement in the informed decision-making process.
To define the real therapeutic objectives and intervention priorities.
To plan the physiotherapy treatment program.
To implement the rehabilitation intervention according to the objectives of the physiotherapy program.
To implement interventions aimed at the assessment, adaptation and packaging and training in the use of aids for the person and the environment.
To verify the rehabilitation methodology implemented for functional recovery objectives.
Physiotherapists also possess skills in the field of Therapeutic Education, in the field of training and self-training, in the field of EBP - practice based on effectiveness, in taking charge according to ethics and professional deontology, in the field of management, in the field of communication and relationship
Career opportunities:
The Physiotherapist finds a place in the National and Regional Health System (see national health contract), in private facilities accredited and affiliated with the NHS, in clinics, rehabilitation facilities and centres, in Residential Health Facilities, spas and wellness centres, medical clinics and/or multi-specialist clinics. The legislation in force enables them to freelance professional activities, in individual or associated professional practices, in various types of sports associations and clubs, in service cooperatives, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), public or private prevention services.
The degree course comes first among the requests for access to the degree courses of health professions at the University of Palermo. Also in Italy, proportionally considering the number of requests, the Physiotherapy Degree Course comes first.
In Italy, statistical data confirm that all graduates in Physiotherapy enter the job market within one year from the qualification. According to statistics, graduates from our University find employment within three months after qualification in the following facilities: Public facilities, FKT-affiliated centres, ADI, RSA, freelance profession.
Graduates in Physiotherapy can continue their studies by obtaining a 2nd cycle degree in Rehabilitation Health Professions Sciences.
---------
Final examination features
The final examination of the Degree Course aims at ascertaining the student’s level of knowledge, ability and skills envisaged by the educational programme, as well as his/her specific professional skills. 
As a qualifying test and in line with current legislation, the final exam consists of:
a) a professional test to verify the acquisition of theoretical and practical skills and abilities specific to the profile
b) the discussion of a paper on a theoretical application topic.
The different parts of the final exam, assessed separately, will contribute to determining the final degree grade.
---------
