Academic year 2024/2025
Bachelor's Degree (BSc) on ORTHOPTICS AND OPHTHALMOLOGIC CARE (QUALIFYING FIOR PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE)
Curriculum: ORTHOTICS AND OPHTHALMOLOGIC CARE (QUALIFYING FOR THE PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE)
For more information visit http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=1407
---------
Class of Bachelor's Degree (BSc) on Health professions for rehabilitation (L/SNT2)
Duration 3 years
Location PALERMO
Number of seats in national planning: 20
Department of Biomedicine, Neurosciences and Advanced Diagnostics
Course Code 2175
---------
Educational objectives
Specific objectives:
The specific educational programme requires that graduates in Orthoptics and ophthalmological carer achieve the skills required by the specific professional profiles detailed in the Ministerial Decree of the Ministry of Health 14 September 1994, n. 743 and subsequent amendments and additions.
The graduate in Orthoptics and ophthalmological care acquire specific competence during the three-year course:
- the 1st year provides knowledge and skills of the preparatory disciplines (physics, chemistry and biochemistry, biology, anatomy and general physiology) aimed at understanding the specific languages of the clinical disciplines, the biological and physiological functions of the human body, and in the second semester a progressive approach to the visual function, through ocular anatomy and physiopathology, the discovery of visual pathology and semiological diagnostic tools aimed at guiding the diagnosis process.
- the 2nd year is all about acquiring knowledge and clinical skills in the field of specific orthoptic sciences (binocular vision disorders), both in the disciplinary fields integrated into the course for skills in paediatrics and child neuropsychiatry, neurology and neurosurgery, otorhinolaryngology and internal medicine; in addition, knowledge and skills in psychological and psycho-pedagogical disciplines are provided;
- the 3rd year is mainly dedicated to completing the specific path, dedicating space to the role of rehabilitator and including managerial training modules such as business organization and forensic medicine.
A lot of training space is dedicated throughout all three years to teachings in the field of Orthoptics and Ophthalmology: each semester, starting from the second of the first year provides content in these areas, in the modules of ocular anatomy and physiology, diseases of the visual system and ocular semiotics, physiopathology of binocular and orthoptic vision, refraction, ophthalmic surgery and assistance, low vision.
The achievement of professional skills is associated with the acquisition of behavioural and relational skills for interacting with patients as well as with colleagues and partners of multidisciplinary teams. Particularly important, for this reason, as an integral and qualifying part of professional training, are the practical training activity and clinical internship, carried out with the supervision and guidance of professional tutors specifically assigned, throughout the three-year period. The course also provides, in relation to specific objectives, in-depth study of some of the indicated teachings and activities, through professionalizing practical activities and internships, at public health facilities and possibly also private and/or accredited ones. This training also aims at the progressive assumption of responsibility and professional autonomy, both in diagnostic and therapeutic rehabilitation fields and provides graduates with the communication method with the patient, as well as the experience of teamwork with other colleagues and health workers.
Finally, graduates acquire tools and skills in the oral and written presentation of scientific content, through the activities promoted by the course also in local and national public scientific occasions (courses and conferences).
Upon completion of the Course of Study, graduates in Orthoptics and Ophthalmological Assistance, in function of the training paths, must be able:
- to treat motor and sensory vision disorders in collaboration with the ophthalmologist.
- to carry out ophthalmological instrumental semiology practices.
- to organize, plan and evaluate the quality of professional acts carried out in the context of patient care, from anamnesis collection to therapeutic strategies.
- to participate in and carry out screening and health education actions for individuals and the population.
- to know the health management and business organization dynamics.
- to be able to manage their own updating and self-updating, also in matters of ethics and professional deontology.
- to contribute directly to the updating relating to their professional profile and research.
---------
Professional opportunities
Profile:
Ophthalmology assistant orthoptist
Functions:
Orthoptists treat motor and sensory vision disorders and perform ophthalmological clinical-instrumental semiology techniques.
They are responsible for the evaluation and rehabilitation of strabismus, at any age, and amblyopia. They implement therapeutic and rehabilitative measures for perceptual-motor disorders of the visual system: they are autonomous in the correction with optical aids and assist the ophthalmologist in the surgical correction of the same, both in the planning and in the execution.
They deal with the prevention of anomalies and visual disorders mainly in preschool and school age, actively participating in the teams that carry out screening programs; for this reason, they find employment in screening in nursery and elementary schools, in paediatric clinics, in the neonatology and paediatrics departments.
They treat and correct refractive disorders of refraction (without prescriptive power, the latter entrusted to the ophthalmologist).
They deal with low vision rehabilitation for any age group, within the multidisciplinary team with ophthalmologists, psychologists, nurses, social workers, as regulated by the implementing decree of law 284/97. They also have a central role in implementing sensorial rehabilitation procedures for the purpose of integrating these handicapped people into less isolated contexts: they verify the adoption of prostheses and aids and their correct use, participate in functional rehabilitation and quantify the results.
They are involved in prevention in the workplace in implementation of DL 81/08: they deal with the screening of personnel subject to exposure to video terminals.
They assist the ophthalmologist in the diagnostic field with regard to the execution of semiological and instrumental diagnostic tests, also taking care of the description of the results.
They carry out teaching and specific applied research activities and professional consultancy also in the medical-legal field.
Graduates in Orthoptics are also responsible for the organization, planning and quality of professional acts carried out within the scope of their duties. They carry out their professional activities in public or private health facilities, as employees or freelancers (DM 14.09.1994, n. 743 (GU 09.01.1995, n. 6). They can find employment in territorial health agencies or in hospital facilities, private or accredited nursing homes, private or contracted ophthalmology medical practices, multidisciplinary screening and prevention teams in schools or in public or private companies, in public or private rehabilitation facilities (with or without accreditation), ONLUS operating in the regional and national territory in the context of prevention or rehabilitation projects (Italian Union of the Blind, Lega del filo d'oro etc.), research institutions and companies that work in bioengineering or prosthetics.
Finally, they can work as freelancers with autonomy of skills.
Skills:
Orthoptists carry out their professional activity in public or private health facilities, as employees or freelancers (DM 14.09.1994, n. 743 (GU 09.01.1995, n. 6).
They can find employment in local health authorities or in hospitals, private or accredited nursing homes, private or affiliated ophthalmology medical practices, multidisciplinary screening and prevention teams in schools or in public or private companies, in public or private rehabilitation facilities (with or without accreditation), non-profit organizations operating in the regional and national territory in the context of prevention or rehabilitation projects (Italian Union of the Blind, Lega del filo d'oro etc.), research institutions and companies that work in bioengineering or prosthetics.
Finally, they can work as autonomous freelancer.
Career opportunities:
In addition to what has been described above, the degree in Orthoptics allows access to the specialist degree in Rehabilitation Sciences of Health Professions and offers, in addition to the technical skills already described, also the possibility of accessing, with this additional qualification, the role of Coordinator of health professions, with superior management and organizational functions.
---------
Final examination features
The final exam of the Degree Course aims at verifying the level achieved by students in the acquisition of knowledge, skills and abilities required by the training project of the Degree Course, as well as their specific professional preparation. Considering that the final exam of the Degree Course in Orthoptics and Ophthalmological Assistance, in addition to its academic value, has the value of an exam for the qualification to practice the health profession, it consists of:
a) a written test on orthoptics and ophthalmology topics.
b) a professional test to verify the acquisition of theoretical-practical skills and abilities related to orthoptics and ophthalmological care practice.
c) the discussion of a paper on a theoretical application topic. The paper can also be written in a foreign language previously agreed upon.
The different parts of the final exam, assessed separately, will contribute to determining the final degree grade.
---------
