Academic year 2024/2025
Bachelor's Degree (BSc) on DISCIPLINE DELLE ARTI, DELLA MUSICA E DELLO SPETTACOLO
Curriculum: ART
For more information visit http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=1564
---------
Class of Bachelor's Degree (BSc) on Visual arts, music, performing arts and fashion studies (L-3)
Duration 3 years
Location PALERMO
Free access
Department of Humanities
Course Code 2199
---------
Educational objectives
The Degree Course in Arts, Music and Performing Arts aims at providing basic and interdisciplinary cultural education where the theory, history, analysis of visual art, music and entertainment forms in the classical and contemporary world, integrate with computer skills and with the knowledge of the principles, methods and techniques of design, architecture and representation. 
The aim of the Course is to provide undergraduates with disciplinary knowledge of arts and of the specific characteristics of media for the production of artistic language and for changing the way of thinking and making art, integrated with interdisciplinary knowledge making them professional and practical. 
The Course provides four curricula: “Arts”, “Music”, “Performing arts”, “Acting and theatre professions”. The latter curriculum is managed in agreement with the Biondo permanent Theater of Palermo, and provides for a very significant use of specific theoretical/practical Internships and Laboratories.
The choice of curriculum-specific courses favours the specialisation of culture as well as the acquisition of basic and soft skills.
Theories and history of the arts are centered on the mechanisms of generation of narratives, images and sounds in the classical world as well as in contemporary times. 
The computer science, design and architecture teachings in the curricula “Arts”, “Music” and “Performing arts”are designed to provide skills and tools to understand and apply the basic technological resources to represent, manage and develop knowledge (digitization, visualization and data base, networks and communication devices), to select and optimize the use of applications depending on the features, the meaning and cultural value of works of art, musical compositions, and drawing practice. 
The IT lessons will provide the principles and operational skills for the software for the design, music production, as well as for the tools for musical and theatrical performances, thus facilitating the mediation between technological knowledge and the world of arts, adapting or conceiving the possible development in function of specific expressive requirements. In this sense, the teachings related to architectural design will provide an important opportunity to mediate scientific knowledge and skills, and knowledge and skills related to the art world. 
The educational objective of the course  is to equip graduates with a theoretical and historical culture and soft skills for the analysis and solution of problems related to the application and development of core technologies for every artistic address. The workshop mode of computer and design teachings, combined with the presence of training and internships, aims at consolidating the acquisition of useful knowledge and skills both to continue the studies with the relevant 2nd cycle Degree Courses and to be valued as human capital in the labour market with respoect to the site potential.
---------
Professional opportunities
Profile: Assistant to the design and implementation of cultural projects in the arts, music, theatre, film, multimedia.
Functions: Operation and management of the design of events, interventions and cultural programs in the arts, music, theatre, cinema, multimedia. The specific preparation of graduates, and their possession of skills and knowledge in theoretical and methodological fields, as well as in IT and design, and in various specific artistic practices, and of their production and use, allows them to organize, coordinate and operationally monitor interventions.
Competencies: Collaboration in the design, implementation, coordination and production verification of cultural interventions in the relevant areas
Professional opportunities might be found in: public and private institutions of production and organization of cultural events; art, music, theatre, film, multimedia institutions; Organization of exhibitions and events; artistic companies; cultural festivals; Radio, television, cinema; agencies specialized in the organization of cultural events; Web sites. 
Profile: Design, construction and management of multimedia materials in the arts, music, theatre, film, multimedia.
Functions: Design of interventions and multimedia materials in the arts; assistance to the design to the checks and operational coordination in the implementation; Care of cultural multimedia content 
Skills: Writing and editing of materials; Coordination of interventions; Finding specific skills and organization of work phases and timing; 
Professional opportunities: Specialised, traditional and multimedia publishing; Radio, television, cinema, web sites; museums, theatres, cinemas. 
Profile: Expert in the manufacturing and design in the field of arts, music, performing arts and media.
Functions: Design, production, study of the feasibility and forms of content mediation in the arts, music, entertainment and media. Preparation of operational plans, drafting of texts; communication design; functions of connection among the various figures involved in the production; Drafting of programs and presentations. 
Skills: Event Management; texts writing ; editing of  projects and presentations; organization, presentation, fund raising; Conduction and cooperation for cultural events. 
Professional opportunities: Authors and editors of texts, programs, presentations, brochures; Creation and collaboration to the design and programming of cultural events.
---------
Final examination features
To obtain the degree, students must have acquired 180 credits, including the credits related to the final examination. The final test has the objective of assessing the level of maturity and critical skills of the undergraduate, with respect to learning and to the acquired knowledge, on completion of the activities provided by the course syllabus. The final examination consists of a written or oral test, in accordance with the rules fixed every year by the Degree Course Regulations for the final examination, respecting and consistent to the calendar, the ministerial requirements and to the relevant Guidelines of the University.
---------
