Academic year 2024/2025
Master's Degree (MSc) on ITALIAN STUDIES
For more information visit http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=1628
---------
Class of Master's Degree (MSc) on Modern philology (LM-14)
Duration 2 years
Location PALERMO
Free access
Department of Humanities
Course Code 2206
---------
Educational objectives
The 2nd cycle Degree course in Italian Studies aims at training graduates competent in Italian linguistics and literature according to both a synchronic and a diachronic approach. With this in mind, the teachings in the literary field range from humanistic-Renaissance literature to contemporary literature, with a focus on the methods of digital texts edition, which constitute an expansion in the direction of the acquisition of soft skills. Similarly, the teachings in the linguistic area are related both to the history of language and to dialectology, as well as to the sociolinguistic situation of contemporary Italy. Given that one of the main professional outlets is that of teaching, the course offers both language teaching methodology and literature teaching methodology, in which linguistic-literary issues are addressed according to the teaching methodology approach. The course also aims to increase the knowledge acquired by students (mostly from the  1st cycle Degree in Humanities) in the previous three years and to refine and develop their critical skills. Its primary objective is to provide for each disciplinary area the most up-to-date research tools enabling graduates to face the complexity of the current days. This objective will be achieved by deepening, in a specialist sense, the contents and knowledge already possessed as well as by perfecting the aptitude for analysis and research, also through a series of teachings completing the educational programme in the field of comparative literature, in the historical and philological fields, in linguistic theory and Latin literature. The skills acquired in the two-year period can be used in research, publishing, libraries, multifunctional centres, in organization and cultural activity in companies and public and private bodies, as well as in the context of creative activities used for social and advertising purposes. In relation to this objective, the course provides, as part of the characterizing activities, credits in the following fundamental scientific sectors: L-FIL-LET/10 Italian literature, L-FIL-LET/11 Literature contemporary Italian, L-FIL-LET/12 Italian linguistics, L-FIL-LET/09 Romance philology. In order to improve the competence of a foreign language, the course includes an English language laboratory in the first year. The course gives also the possibility of carrying out an internship at schools or other institutions, in order to provide a first contact with the world of work, particularly significant for a 2nd cycle degree.
The teachings consist of lectures and seminar activities during which, through intense oral and written activity, contents and methodologies will be deepened according to a full critical and expository development.
The examinations related to individual teachings may consist of both oral and written tests.
The methods of verifying the laboratory training activity are entrusted to in progress and final written and practical tests. The procedure for verifying the internship and traineeship activities consist of a final report signed by the student, by the degree program delegate, and by the head of the organization or institution and approved by the Board of the Degree Course.
The objective of the degree course is providing graduates with a preferential qualification within different career structures in the teaching of the humanities area. In conclusion, the Degree Course aims to make its graduates able to fit into professional areas relating to publishing, advertising, research, organization and management of cultural events.
---------
Professional opportunities
Profile:
Linguists, Philologists and Editors.
Functions:
Experts of Italian linguistics and textual philology
Skills:
Graduates in Italian Studies carry out research on the origin, evolution and structure of languages, on the relations among languages of the same family and modern languages, grammars and words; they apply linguistic knowledge for the critical review of written texts to publish, audio-visual and multimedia texts.
Career opportunities:
-	Research institutions;
-	Local agencies (municipalities, provinces, regions);
-	Cultural promotion sectors;
-	Research centres and literary parks;
-	Publishing houses;
-	Periodical press (newspapers, magazines) or journalism.
Profile:
Assistant archivist, assistant librarian, assistant museum conservator.
Functions:
Assistance in archives and libraries and in museum conservation.
Skills:
Evaluation and guarantee of the conservation of archives for public usability.
Organisation of promotion activities, exhibitions and events.
Books classification and cataloguing.
Career I Opportunities:
-	Public and private libraries;
-	Archives;
-	Foundations;
-	Museums;
-	Training bodies.
Profile:
Editors of technical and advertising texts
Skills:
Writing of guides, technical appendixes, sheets, information texts and instruction booklets for consumer goods, machines and equipment.
Career opportunities:
Public and private agencies;
Historical archives;
Private companies.
Profile:
Researchers and graduate technicians in philological-literary studies
Functions:
Philological-literary research.
Skills:
Cooperation with university lecturer in the design and implementation of educational and curricular activities;
Tutoring for students;
Design and implementation of academic theoretical and experimental research aiming at widening and innovating scientific knowledge.
Career Opportunities:
Universities;
Public and private research agencies.
---------
Final examination features
The final examination consists of the preparation of a written dissertation in which students demonstrate their ability to deal with the topic chosen with appropriate cognitive tools as well as writing skills. The test, showing graduate’s overall preparation, entails, as peculiar elements, autonomy and originality of process and results.
The discussion and evaluation methods in terms of the final vote of this report are set out in the Final Examination Regulations, in accordance with the University Regulations.
---------
