Academic year 2024/2025
Bachelor's Degree (BSc) on DENTAL HYGIENE
For more information visit http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=1625
---------
Class of Bachelor's Degree (BSc) on Technical health professions (L/SNT3)
Duration 3 years
Location PALERMO
Number of seats in national planning: 16
Department of Precision Medicine in Medical, Surgical, and Critical Care
Course Code 2208
---------
Educational objectives
The  Degree Course specifically aims at training professionals capable of using the methodologies and technologies of the dental technician profession, pursuant to Law No 251 of 10 August 2000,Article 3, paragraph 1.
Graduates, therefore, must be adequately trained in core disciplines, to enable them to better understand the most important elements underlying the developmental, adult and geriatric age-related pathological processes upon which it focuses they carry out their diagnostic intervention. They must also be able to use at least one language of the European Union, besides Italian, in the specific area of competence and for exchanging general information.
The educational bodies identify for this purpose, through the appropriate selection of the disciplinary fields of the class-specific training activities, with particular regard to the professional disciplines, the specific course outlines. In particular, according to the aforementioned course outlines, graduates must reach the professional competences described and specified below with respect to the individual profiles identified by the competent ministerial authority. The achievement of professional skills is obtained through theoretical and practical training, including the acquisition of behavioural skills and is achieved in the specific context of the profile so as to guarantee, at the end of the training course, full command of all the necessary Skills and their immediate usability in the working environment. Particularly important, as an integral and qualifying part of the vocational training, is the practical training and clinical training activities, carried out with the supervision and guidance of specially assigned professional tutors, coordinated by a tenured professor of the specific disciplinary training field envisaged for each professional profile. With reference to the core role of the Internship Coordinator, it should be noted that MIUR Circular on May 13, 2013 has set an exception for trainee Coordinators, identified as Directors of Didactic Activities, exempting them from Master Degree and non-operation in public facilities. 
The course will be complemented with elective activities (internships, conferences, seminars, workshops, training courses, and elective subjects) enabling the completion of training through the study of disciplines related to other areas of Health professions and the acquisition of useful knowledge and skills for the working environment.
The course also provides for training activities related to radiation protection, in accordance with the contents of Annex IV of Legislative Decree of May, 26, 2000.
The educational programme also provides the educational activities referred to in art. 10, paragraph 5, letters a, c, d, e of the Ministerial decree October 22, 2004, no. 270, and namely: 6 credits for elective activities; 9 credits for the final exam and for the English language; 6 credits for other activities such as computer science, seminar activities, etc. and 3 credits for the specific profile professional labs; finally, 60 credits are reserved for training internships in the specific professional area.
The graduates of the class, in accordance with the aforementioned educational programme, must reach the skills identified by the specific professional profiles of the areas, as described by the Ministry of Health decree mentioned in the premise.
---------
Professional opportunities
Profile:
Dental hygienist
Functions:
The course in "Dental Hygiene" is part of the class L/SNT3 TECHNICAL HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONS.
Graduates in this class L/SNT3, pursuant to Article 6, paragraph 3 of Legislative Decree no. 502 of 30 December 1992 and subsequent amendments and additions, pursuant to Law No 42 of 26 February 1999 and to Law no. 251, are health professionals whose field of activity and responsibility is determined by the contents of the ministerial decrees setting up professional profiles and by the educational programmes of their respective university and post-graduate courses as well as specific codes of ethics.
At the end of the training cycle, the profile is that of a healthcare professional of the technical care class (dental hygienist) working in the healthcare, carrying out with professional title and autonomy, technical care activities, as provided for in the regulations concerning the identification of the figures and their professional profiles defined by decree of the Minister of Health.
The general cultural profile provides that graduates in dental hygiene are adequately trained in basic disciplines, enabling them to better understand the most important elements that are the basis of oro-dental (oral cavity) pathologies arising in the developmental, adult and geriatric age, upon which they carry out their actions for the improvement of oral health (through primary prevention, secondary prevention or therapeutic assistance). They must also be able to use at least one language of the European Union, besides Italian, in the specific professional field. 
More in detail, the Degree Course in Dental Hygiene, even though a technical course, provides also competences in prevention: prevention and assistance are the two natural areas in which every dental hygienist works.
Graduates in dental hygiene will carry out the activities provided by the Decree of the Ministry Of Health, 15 March 1999, no. 137 and successive modifications and integrations; that is to say, they carry out tasks related to the prevention of or-dental affections of any age group, as indicated by dental practitioners and medical surgeons qualified to practice dentistry, 
Dental Hygiene graduates perform dental health education and participate in primary prevention projects of dental health, also within the public healthcare system; they collaborate on the compilation of the dentist's clinical record and deal with the collection of technical-statistical data; Provide the deplaquing of dental surfaces, the ablation of the tartar and the sanding of roots, as well as the topical application of various prophylactic means; they provide instruction on the various oral hygiene methods and on the use of diagnostic tools to highlight bacterial plaque and microbiological colonization, motivating the need for periodic clinical controls; they explain the rules of a rational diet for the protection of dental health. Current oral health demand is reflected in the demand for a combination of basic and professional skills that result in the formation of a professional profile of the expert in Oral Health Prevention, of both the individual patient and of the community. The dental hygienist may be employed in the design, production, management of oral health prevention services, in the provision of professional health services (eg dental deplaquing, tartar ablation, periodontal survey, dental charts compilation, surface sealing seals), in the use of non-invasive medical devices for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes, and in the use of appropriate medical diagnostic software (eg digital periodontal survey, crevicular fluid extraction, alitometry).
The WHO's Global Goals to be achieved by 2020 establish, with scientific evidence, the need to guide public health policy towards projects relating to oral health and lifestyles. Among healthcare professionals in the technical-care class, hygienists have the skills to deal with primary prevention (proper lifestyles) and secondary prevention by intercepting signs and symptoms of serious diseases such as oral cancer, and at the same time with oral healthcare through hygiene interventions in the oral cavity that improve the state of health at all ages.
The profession of dental hygienist can be carried out in different areas: the private one within the dental surgeries, where they provide access to quality care, the public facilities (local health companies, public hospitals, University hospitals), where they operate in prevention services, as well as in scientific research, the community social services, elderly and long-term residences, centers for disabilities, schools.
In all these areas, the activity of dental hygienists improves the cost/benefit ratio of dental care due to the preventive character of their work.
In the modern conception of oral cavity medicine, dental hygienists are, directly or on the advice of the dentist, in charge of the oral health care of the patient (adult or child) with chronic or neoplastic systemic pathology (ie special care) at public or private healthcare facilities.
Finally, graduates in Dental Hygiene can continue their training in the Italian Universities providing 2nd cycle degrees (http://www.aiditalia.it/sedi-laurea-specialistica/).
Professional opportunities:
Graduates in Dental Hygiene can work both as private practitioners and in hospitals, health care facilities, and also in research centers and universities. In fact, they are  healthcare professionals as provided by the Decree of the Ministry of Health of March 15, 1999, No.137 and subsequent modifications and additions, who carry out, as assigned by dentists and medical surgeons legitimate to the practice of dentistry, tasks related to the prevention of oro-dental affections.
---------
Final examination features
To be admitted to the final examination, students must have passed all the examinations provided  by the course programme, including professionalising and internship activities, and they must have acquired the relevant credits.
The final examination is a national examination qualifying for the profession. 
The final examination consists of:
a)	A practical test during which students must prove the acquisition of the specific theoretical-practical and technical.-operational skills;
b)	The presentation and discussion of a dissertation.
---------
