Academic year 2024/2025
Master's Degree (MSc) on ARCHAEOLOGY
For more information visit http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=1778
---------
Class of Master's Degree (MSc) on Archaeology (LM-2)
Duration 2 years
Location PALERMO
Free access
Department of Cultures and Societies
Course Code 2218
---------
Educational objectives
The Degree course provides full advanced training in Archaeology, with respect, in particular, to classic archaeology, which benefits of a long study tradition in the University of Palermo, as well as to pre-classic and post-classic archaeology, and to applied sciences. The course has a strong humanistic approach, aiming at providing students not only with the historical understanding of archaeological evidence (sites, monuments or artifacts), but also with the ability to situate it in its context independently and critically, drawing on various documentary sources, from literary or epigraphic text to the evidences of the settlement or material culture. The course also provides methodological and applied expertise, thanks to the technical and scientific subjects (applied physics and chemistry for archaeology) and laboratory activities, also aiming at the experimentation of computer tools for recording, analysing, querying and processing archaeological data. Through practical activities included in the field of “other educational activities” and internships/stage at Agencies and Institutions for the management and defence of Cultural Heritage, students acquire the ability to conduct field work (whether archaeological excavation, surface research or analysis of artefacts) independently, but under the guidance of a research manager and/or within work groups. Students will autonomously choose the specific curriculum best fitting their personal interests, in the field of classical , post-classical or middle East archaeology, with a historical-artistic approach, or an approach focusing on material culture and settlements, or on methodology and applied sciences. Laboratory and/or field activities are awarded with adequate credits, giving students the chance to learn specific experimental techniques and to practice various archaeological disciplines on field (through excavation, landscape archaeological research, analysis of artefacts). Given the commitment in terms of time for gathering, classifying and processing research data, the final examination is awarded with the maximum number of possible credits. Particular attention is paid to study experiences abroad, through the Erasmus programme, namely with the University of Gottingen for the double degree awarded at selected students having attended a semester at the partner institution.
---------
Professional opportunities
Profile: Archaeologist
Functions: Archaeological excavation manager. Responsible for emergency excavation site. Contributor to exhibitions, conservation and glamorisation in museum facilities, archaeological parks etc. 
Skills: Scientific management of archaeological excavation. Classification and documentation of archaeological finds, UT, UTM, RA etc. editing. Creation of catalogues, scientific reports and museum itineraries. Organization of conferences and exhibitions. Promotion of cultural initiatives. Organization of teaching activities on archaeological sites and museums. 
Professional opportunities:
State and Local Public Authorities (Museums, Cultural Heritage Superintendence); Youth archaeological research cooperatives, cooperation with private companies for the writing of archaeological risk maps, cooperation with the Superintendence for the monitoring of public works.
Profile:
Physical anthropologist
Functions:
Head of the archaeological excavation (anthropological and paleo-anthropological context). Collaborator in the preparation of exhibitions, and in the activities of training, teaching and education of anthropological and paleo-anthropological interest.
Skills:
Scientific conduct of an anthropological and paleo-anthropological excavation. Classification, analysis and documentation of anthropological and paleo-anthropological findings. Drafting of catalogues, scientific reports and museum itineraries. Organization of conferences and exhibitions. Promotion of cultural initiatives. Organization of teaching activities on archaeological sites and in museums.
Professional opportunities:
National and local public bodies (Museums, superintendence BB.CC.); youth cooperatives of archaeological and paleo-anthropological research.
---------
Final examination features
It consists of an original written dissertation which may also be a multimedia or digital product, written under the guidance of a supervising professor and possible co-examiners, about a topic related to the studied disciplinary areas and to the educational programme , demonstrating the acquisition of sound methodological abilities,  of the specialist knowledge typical of the degree course and of the critical thinking skills about the dissertation topic(s), with respect to the above described educational objectives. The final dissertation may also be related to field activities, or to activities carried out during internship periods in other facilities.
---------
