Academic year 2024/2025
Bachelor's Degree (BSc) on NURSING
For more information visit http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=1882
---------
Class of Bachelor's Degree (BSc) on Nursing and midwifery (L/SNT1)
Duration 3 years
Location PALERMO
Number of seats in national planning: 60
Department of Health promotion, maternal-child, excellence internal and specialist medicine “G.D’Alessandro”
Course Code 2233
---------
Educational objectives
Graduates of the class will possess an adequate preparation in the basic disciplines, such as to allow them an optimal understanding of the phenomena underlying the physiological and pathological processes towards which their preventive and therapeutic intervention is directed, as well as the maximum integration with other professions in Italy and in European Union and non-European countries.
They will also know how to adequately use the English language to interact within an international context (member countries of the European Union and non-European countries) with respect to specific acquired skills and through the exchange of general information.
The achievement of professional skills will be obtained through a theoretical-practical training including also, and  above all, the acquisition of behavioural and deontological skills in the working context, such as to guarantee, at the end of the course, a full command of all the necessary skills and the their immediate practical application in the Italian and foreign work environment.
Particularly important, as an integral and qualifying part of professional training, is practical clinical training and internship, which will be carried out at the IRCCS-ISMETT under the supervision and the guidance of dedicated English-speaking tutors coordinated by the director of professionalizing activities, a teacher belonging to the highest level of training in the professional profile, corresponding to the European standards.
Specifically, the Degree course has a duration of three years, divided into six semesters, for a total of 180 credits. It is organized in such a way as to provide adequate preparation in core and class-specific subjects.
The first year aims at providing biomedical knowledge (anatomy, biology and genetics, physiology), as well as the fundamentals of professional discipline (general nursing, psychology and bioethics), necessary to face the first internship experience, aiming at guiding the student to the professional fields of reference and to the acquisition of basic assistance skills.
The second year aims at deepening the physio-pathological, pharmacological and clinical-assistance knowledge to tackle the most common health problems of medicine (internal medicine, gastroenterology, infectious diseases, oncology) and surgery (general surgery, urology) with preventive interventions, aimed at the diagnosis (radiology) and the management of the acute and chronic phase of the disease. During the second year the student also acquires knowledge and skills related to nursing care in these areas, including rehabilitation. Specific educational activities are also planned to develop methodological skills to understand scientific and nursing research.
The third year provides in-depth specialization and the acquisition of methodologies related to professional practice, as well as the ability to work in a team; knowledge and skills relating to maternal and child care and emergency-urgency are also provided. The interpersonal skills necessary to interact with patients, caregivers, and with the institutional and professional system are developed through the teachings of human sciences and educational psychology (forensics, clinical psychology).
Alongside the frontal teaching activity in English, there is a parallel guided internship path, also divided into three years, in which the student, always supported by an English-speaking clinical tutor, learns and applies a series of interventions aimed at planning the nursing work; the internship, whose programs are commensurate to the degree of knowledge that the student possesses in a given year of course, involves increasing degrees of complexity of the interventions performed so that, at the end of the studies, a graduate in Nursing is able to perform the work of a nurse in complete autonomy.
---------
Professional opportunities
Profile:
Nurse
Functions:
Pursuant to the law of 10 August 2000, n. 251, article 1, paragraph 1, graduates of the Nursing Degree Course, are health professionals in the area of nursing sciences who carry out activities with professional autonomy for the prevention, treatment and protection of individual and collective health, carrying out the functions identified by the professional profile 739/94 as well as the deontological code of 2009 and using planning methodologies for assistance objectives in the evolutionary , adult and geriatric age.
The nurse is the health care worker responsible for general preventive, curative, palliative and rehabilitative nursing care. The main functions are disease prevention, assistance to the sick and disabled of all ages, as well as  health education in Italy and in foreign countries. The functions of the graduate have been described in accordance to, the 2018 “Guidelines and Reference Points for the Design and Delivery of Degree Programs in Nursing “, and in particular Chapter 6 and the Appendix 1A "Subject specific competences - Bachelors level with registration
Skills:
a) identification of the health needs of the person and the community;
b) identification of the needs for nursing care of the person and the community and formulation of the related objectives;
c) planning, management and evaluation of nursing care in chronic and emergency-urgent conditions;
d) guaranteeing the correct application of diagnostic-therapeutic prescriptions;
e) ability to act both individually and in collaboration with other socio-sanitary operators;
f) professional activity in public or private health facilities, in the territory and in home assistance, in a dependent or private practice regime in Italy or within the European Union.
g) adequate knowledge of the English language, a relational tool appropriate to the geographical context.
opportunities:
Graduates of the degree course in Nursing will carry out their professional activity in a very broad territorial context: public or private health facilities, territorial facilities, home assistance, as employees or free-lance. They will contribute to the training of support staff and will directly contribute to the updating of their professional profile and research. They can continue their studies in the Master's Degree in Nursing and Midwifery Sciences, or to the Master Degree in Nursing and Health available in Italy or in other European Union countries.
---------
Final examination features
The degree examination, qualifying for the nursing profession, will take place according to the indications of Ministerial Decree 270/04, article 11, paragraph 3-d. Therefore, to be admitted to the final exam students must have achieved 174 credits. The degree in Nursing is achieved by passing a final exam in English consisting of the preparation and discussion of a written paper on a theoretical-practical topic. The discussion is preceded by a professional test, qualifying for the profession of nurse, during which students must demonstrate they have acquired the knowledge, skills and abilities related to nursing care practice. This practical test can be performed either in patients' beds or as a simulation.
The final exam has the value of a State examination qualifying for professional practice.
---------
