Academic year 2024/2025
Master's Degree (MSc) on BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
For more information visit http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=1876
---------

Duration 2 years
Location PALERMO
Free access
Department of Engineering
Double Degree with Ecole Nationale Superieure D’Architecture de Saint Etienne ENSASE, Saint - Etienne (FRANCE)
Course Code 2236
---------
Educational objectives
The primary objective of this course is to train professionals with multidisciplinary skills ranging from engineering to the medical-biological field.
The professional profile of Biomedical Engineer (ISTAT code, 2.2.1.8.0) is therefore multi-purpose and able to profitably enter the job market and profession in the biomedical field.
More specifically, the Course aims at training professionals capable of using the methodologies and technologies of engineering in order to understand, formalize and solve problems of medical-biological interest, through close collaboration with the specialists of the various sectors involved.
The educational project of the course provides a solid and complete preparation mainly focused on the ability to design devices, materials, equipment and instrumentation for diagnostic, therapeutic and rehabilitative use, to design of healthcare systems and environments, as well as skills related to the control and management of health care, biomechanical modelling and biomedical signals, regenerative medicine technologies and tissue engineering. Graduates will be able to analyse medical-biological signals, images, and data, and will be able to apply methodological tools and quantitative methods for the study of physiological systems.
The path includes a group of common courses followed by two groups of mandatory optional subjects in which three typical areas of biomedical engineering are identified: biomaterials, diagnostic technologies, biomechanics, enabling students to deepen and further focus on some specific aspects. In particular, in the field of biomaterials, the aspects of biomaterials, an of their biocompatibility and biodegradation are explored; in the field of diagnostic technologies, aspects of electronics, internet-of-things and robotics are explored; in the field of biomechanics, some aspects of biomechanics of biological tissues and medical robotics are explored.
The educational programme is enriched and completed with elective activities (internships, apprenticeships, conferences, seminars, workshops, conferences, training courses, and elective teachings), enabling students to integrate their own training through the study of disciplines related to other scientific-engineering fields and the acquisition of contextual knowledge and skills useful for entering the job market.
In this way, it is possible to obtain graduates in Biomedical Engineering that can be immediately used in the world of work and, at the same time, provide them with a solid preparation for continuing their university education (e.g. masters, specialization courses, PhDs).
The Course is offered in Italian and English, as it contains training paths in which there are mandatory courses taught in English.
---------
Professional opportunities
Profile:
Biomedical engineer
Functions:
Graduates in Biomedical Engineering can apply their skills in various professional areas and contexts, with specific reference to the field of biomaterials, diagnostic technologies and biomechanics, and their respective applications.
In the field of biomaterials, they deal with the preparation and characterization of biomaterials in the field of prosthetics, diagnostics, and treatment, with particular attention to the study of the relationships among processing, structure, and properties. In detail, these professionals must be able to plan and evaluate the use of suitable materials for medical devices for diagnosis, for the prevention and treatment of diseases or handicaps, for the replacement or modification of the anatomy or of a physiological process. The biomaterials must be actively employed for the development of biosensors, new prostheses and artificial organs, devices for biomedical, pharmacological and support-aid tools for the disabled.
In the field of diagnostic technologies, they deal with the study and description of electrical and/or magnetic phenomena, with the processing of data and images, with the modelling of physiological systems, with the implementation and application of methods for the management and transmission of medical information. In addition, they must be able to design, build and test medical devices and systems intended for diagnosis, therapy or monitoring. Furthermore, graduates are involved in the production and implementation of biosensors, electromedical equipment, clinical decision support systems, healthcare information systems and, lastly, in the development of medical software.
In the field of biomechanics, graduates will have specific skills on the applications of the relevant dynamics for the biomedical field and the biomechanics of human movement; the methodological and calculation tools necessary for the description of the phenomena of transport of fluids and substances in the health sector; elements of medical robotics and computational biomechanics and specific design methods for cardiovascular prostheses and life support systems.
Skills:
Graduates in Biomedical Engineering possess a solid basic education in engineering disciplines, integrated and assisted by specific knowledge in the various specific fields.
In the field of biomaterials, they consolidate their preparation on their main properties and characteristics and on the nature of the interactions between them and biological tissues. Furthermore, they are able to design artificial systems for the functional recovery of the tissue or organ to be replaced, integrated or rehabilitated.
In the field of diagnostic technologies, they consolidate their preparation on the analysis, modelling and processing of biomedical signals, as well as in the electronic, mechatronic and robotic sector, supported by a basic preparation in the medical-biological sector with knowledge of applications specifications. They must be able to process and analyse signals, images and medical-biological data, and must know how to apply the design techniques of electronic circuits, methodological tools as well as the quantitative methods for the study of physiological systems.
In the field of biomechanics, they consolidate their preparation of biomechanical applications and the study of movement, as well as functional devices for controlled release. They must know how to use the methodological and calculation tools necessary for the description of the phenomena of transport of fluids and substances in the biomedical field.
To operate correctly, they must possess adequate basic skills in mathematics, chemistry, physics, and biomechanics, already acquired in the first cycle degree course.
Professional opportunities:
Graduates in Biomedical Engineering can work as freelancers as well as and in industries, hospitals, healthcare facilities and specialized clinical laboratories, research centres and universities.
As far as the field of biomaterials is concerned, graduates will be able to work in research, design and/or production of materials with reference to biomaterials for biomedical devices, systems and equipment for diagnosis, treatment and rehabilitation.
In the field of diagnostic technologies, these professionals can be employed in the design, production, management and testing of biomedical and pharmaceutical equipment, in the solution of methodological and technological problems in the physiological field, in the provision of health services, and in the use of appropriate medical software for diagnostic assistance, including quality services, safety, organization, information systems in the health sector.
In the field of biomechanics, graduates will be able to work in research activities, effectively using methodologies and tools to describe the behaviour of biomechanical, bioartificial, biological structures and components.
In accordance with current legislation, graduates in Biomedical Engineering can access the profession after passing the national qualification exam and registering. Finally, the achievement of the degree in Biomedical Engineering allows, after a subsequent period of training and under the guidance of the relevant qualified expert, to access the qualification exam for registration in the list of I level qualified experts in charge of physical surveillance of radiation protection.
---------
Final examination features
To obtain the degree, students must have acquired 120 credits including those relating to the final exam.
The Final Examination of the 2nd cycle Degree Course in Biomedical Engineering consists of the discussion of a written dissertation (Degree Thesis), prepared by the student under the guidance of an academic supervisor.
The thesis, whose topic is approved in advance by the Degree Course Council, explores issues of relevant scientific content by addressing studies and achievements that place the accent on innovative aspects of the typical research sectors of Biomedical Engineering.
---------
