Academic year 2024/2025
Bachelor's Degree (BSc) on AUDIOPROTHESIC TECHNIQUES
For more information visit http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=1897
---------
Class of Bachelor's Degree (BSc) on Technical health professions (L/SNT3)
Duration 3 years
Location PALERMO
Number of seats in national planning: 20
Department of Biomedicine, Neurosciences and Advanced Diagnostics
Course Code 2237
---------
Educational objectives
Graduates in Audioprothesic Techniques are, in compliance with the article 3 of the Law 10 August 2000, n. 251, health professionals in the technical area carrying out, with professional autonomy, activities aiming at the prevention, care and protection of individual and collective health. They also apply the necessary procedures to carry out diagnostic procedures on biological materials or on the individual, or technical care, implementing the provisions od the regulations related to the identification of the professional profiles specified with Decree of the Ministry of Health.
The degree course aims at training graduates with high scientific and technological awareness of the managerial, educational and research processes in the field of the audioprothesic application, programming, and evaluation.
The three-year course provides the acquisition of 180 credits in total (60 of which in professional internship activities), enabling the achievement of full and autonomous professional competence.
The achievement of the professional competences is obtained through a theoretical and practical training, also including behavioural skills, which is achieved in the specific professional context, ensuring, at the end of the educational programme, full command of all the necessary skills as well as their immediate value in the workplace.
The specific educational objectives of the course are defined, for the specific professional profile, in compliance to the Health Minister’s Decree 14 September 1994, n. 668.
Specifically, graduates in audioprothesic techniques must acquire adequate basic knowledge in applied physics, statistics, computer science, and biochemistry; they must learn the bases of the anatomy, physiology and physiopathology of the hearing system, as well as the adequate theoretical bases in the technical, in general and specialist medical, and social subjects to carry out their professional activities.
At the end of the educational programme, Audioprothesic technicians must know and apply the instrumental methodologies to perform otoscopic and audiometric evaluations in children and adults; they must also know and be able to apply the main methods for the rehabilitation of deafness, from the production of the hearing aid to the selection, coupling, fitting, control, and technical assistance.
Graduates must acquire the ability to work in multidisciplinary teams, to interact with their colleagues and other health professionals as well as to communicate and interact with the patient and/or with the caregivers as well as with the social context, respecting their cultural and behavioural differences; the must develop cultural and methodological skills as well as an attitude to lifelong learning, ensuring them technical-professional, decision-making, operational and managerial autonomy.
They must also know at least one European Union language, in their specific professional field and to exchange general information.
The educational programme ensures, with respect to these specific educational objectives a unitary and at the same time interdisciplinary vision of the educational objectives, deepening the knowledge of class specific area, as well as the professional and related and integrative areas.
Educational programme
The set of knowledge that will be acquired by the graduate constitute the cultural, scientific and relational background necessary to acquire full professional competence and to understand, face and manage pathological events requiring the assistance and rehabilitation intervention of the audioprothesic Technician.
The Course activities include lectures, seminars, exercises, working groups and discussion on relevant topics and on simulations pursuing the objectives of the training course. The teaching process will make use of modern teaching tools. The traditional educational activity is flanked by guided internships in specialized public health services and other qualified private companies under specific agreements. This training allows a progressive assumption of responsibility and professional autonomy, in which the students of Audioprothesic Techniques acquire the ability to evaluate the various problems related to assistance in the audioprothesic field and to integrate into a work team by cooperating with the different care professionals in the various contexts of public health and assistance. The laboratory and internship activities are carried out under the supervision and guidance of professional tutors specifically designated based on high communication skills.
The internship path will be evaluated through evaluation forms and internship record book, examining the general, behavioural and professional aspects in relation to the objectives, compiled by the tutor and shared by the student.
The final exam consists of a test aiming at demonstrating practical skills and the discussion of a theoretical-applicative paper (Degree Thesis).
At the end of the three-year period, graduates in Audioprothesic Techniques will have acquired the knowledge and technical skills favouring their employability in Hearing Aid companies and bodies in the clinical audiology area. Graduates will also have acquired the learning skills necessary to undertake specialist studies.
---------
Professional opportunities
Profile:
Audioprothesic technician
Functions:
The Audioprothesic technician is responsible for the supply, adaptation and control of prosthetic devices for the prevention and correction of hearing impairment; he/she carries out counselling activities related to the use of hearing aids and operates on a doctor's prescription by means of professional actions involving full responsibility and consequent autonomy.
Skills:
The activity of graduates aims at the application of prosthetic devices through the relief of the external auditory canal footprint, the construction and application of snails or other acoustic coupling systems and the administration of prosthetic evaluation tests. They also collaborate with other professional figures in prevention and rehabilitation programs for deafness by providing prosthetic devices and training in their use. They have teaching and scientific skills in Prosthetic Audiology and can be included in multidisciplinary teams for clinical and research activities.
opportunities:
The audioprothesic technician may work as an employee or as-professional consultant in public or private institutions dealing with audiological rehabilitation both in childhood and in adulthood.
---------
Final examination features
Pursuant to Article 6, paragraph 3 of Legislative Decree no. 502/1992 and subsequent amendments, and art. 6 of the Interministerial Decree of 19 February 2009 (Determination of the degrees of university degrees in health professions), the final exam of the Degree Course qualifies for professional practice. The final exam consists of the preparation  of a written dissertation and in the assessment of practical skills and is organized in two sessions, on dates set by a decree of the Ministry of Education, University and Scientific and Technological Research In agreement with the Ministry of Health.
The final examination is awarded with 6 credits and consists of:
-	A practical test, during which students must demonstrate they have acquired the knowledge and the specific theoretical-practical and technical-operational skills of the professional profile;
-	The preparation and discussion of a dissertation
The subject of the thesis can be:
a) Compilation: analysis and discussion of a general or specific issue of the degree course in Audioprothesic techniques through the literature data;
b) Experimental: setting up a study issue and execution of a specific research plan.
To be admitted to the final exam, the student must:
Have attended all the teaching courses and have passed the relevant examinations;
Have obtained 174 CFU;
Have submitted in time a special application for the award of the thesis to one of the teachers of the course;
Have submitted, in time and manner defined by the secretary's office, a specific application to the Rector and any other required documents
Have submitted the required number of copies of the degree thesis to the teaching secretariat at least 30 days prior to the scheduled date for the discussion.
---------
