Academic year 2024/2025
Master's Degree (MSc) on HUMAN FEEDING AND NUTRITION SCIENCES
For more information visit http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=1946
---------

Duration 2 years
Location PALERMO
Number of seats in local planning: 43
Department of Biological, Chemical and Pharmaceutical Sciences and Technologies
Course Code 2245
---------
Educational objectives
In accordance to the qualifying objectives of the degree class LM-61, the course aims at training graduates, providing sound interdisciplinary scientific education in the field of human feeding and nutrition, capable of carrying out specialised tasks and complex activities in the evaluation, coordination, control, programming, planning, management and training in various professional contexts (healthcare, industry, regulatory), aiming at maintaining and promoting human health.
Therefore, the educational programme aims at providing the following skills:
a)	Sound knowledge of the nutritional and hygienic-sanitary properties of the various food components.
b)	in-depth knowledge of the possible contaminants in food products, with particular attention to the sources of pollution, the ways in which foods can be contaminated and the specific mechanisms of the toxic action of the various xenobiotics;
c)	Ability to evaluate the nutritional characteristics of foods and their modifications induced by technological and biotechnological processes.
d)	Knowledge and ability to evaluate the bioavailability of nutrients in foods and food supplements and to predict their effects.
e)	Ability to use nutritional strategies to prevent the onset of diseases related to nutrition excess or defect.
f)	Acquisition of the tools for a correct assessment of body composition using methods for evaluating body metabolism and energy expenditure.
g)	Knowledge of the analytical methods for assessing food safety and suitability for human consumption.
h)	Legislative knowledge of all the accreditation and surveillance procedures of laboratories and health facilities intended for the preparation, conservation and distribution of food.
i)	Ability to participate actively in training, education and dissemination activities on food quality.
The educational programme is structured as follows: during the 1st year, students will study subjects aiming at obtaining a broad spectre preparation, deeply investigating, therefore, class specific subjects such as: chemistry of active biomolecules, nutrition biochemistry, food chemistry and technology, pharmacology and gastroenterology; 6 credits are provided for language skills (English – level B2)
The second course year mainly aims at the study of nutritional analysis methodologies, feeding in various physiological and pathological conditions, food behaviour and hormonal disorders, and applied dietetic techniques.
The second year also provides an internship to be carried out at the university as well as at public and private companies accredited with the University of Palermo (6 credits), and the preparation of the degree dissertation,
---------
Professional opportunities
Profile:
Nutritional Biologist/Expert in Food Science and Human Nutrition
Functions:
The Degree Course provides graduates with the tools for investigating food styles and evaluating the healthy properties of foods and diets. The professional nutritionist biologist/expert in feeding and human nutrition sciences works at all levels of the food system (from the formulation to the distribution of foodstuff, from catering to the development of healthy eating styles). Graduates will be able to work with wide autonomy, taking also the responsibility for projects, structures and staff.
The functions of the SANU graduate can be summarized as follows:
Evaluation of the nutritional characteristics of foods, the bioavailability of their components and their modifications induced by technological and biotechnological processes.
Study and characterization of functional foods and nutraceuticals in relation to their impact on human health.
Quality control of foods, food processing and distribution chains with respect to nutritional aspects and potential health risks.
Evaluation of nutritional status, eating habits, and nutritional needs in the different phases or life conditions of individuals and populations.
Knowledge of national and international food policies.
Design of nutritional plans aimed at individuals and population groups in the different phases or life conditions.
Training, education and dissemination about nutritional quality and correct lifestyles.
Basic and applied scientific research
Skills:
With reference to the activities codified by ISTAT, job opportunities are identified in the field of freelance and entrepreneurial activities in the field of Life Sciences (Biologists and similar professions - 2.3.1.1.1 and Researchers and graduate technicians in biological sciences - 2.6.2.2.1)
The skills of the graduate in Human Feeding and Nutrition Sciences include:
a) the development, formulation and enhancement of foodstuff with high nutritional impact (functional food, food for a particular diet and for special medical purposes).
b) the management of labelling and information relating to nutritional claims and more generally of the various aspects of communication.
c) the research and documentation of the health effects of food (health claims).
d) the quality control of food, transformation and distribution chains, with respect to nutritional aspects and to possible threats for health.
e) the proposal and verification of protocols for proper nutrition aimed at maintaining an optimal state of health.
f) the setting up and management of nutrition education programs targeted to the general population or specific groups.
g) the collaboration in food consumption surveys and nutritional surveillance programs.
h) the market research and related activities in relation to food production.
i) basic and applied scientific research in the human nutrition sector.
l) the training of operators in the agri-food sector in the quality and safety fields.
Professional opportunities:
Graduates of the Degree Course in Food Science and Human Nutrition (SANU) will be able to carry out activities in the context of the freelance and entrepreneurial activities of the Biologist.
The training course provides a strong integration among the disciplines related to the characterization of foods and the management of the agri-food system, and those of human nutrition and biomedicine, and will lead to the training of  professionals capable of evaluating the quality, safety and healthiness of foods, functional foods, nutraceuticals and food supplements, as well as nutritional needs in particular physiological and pathological states.
This course also allows access to PhD courses and graduate schools and also provides professional opportunities in the research sector. 
Employment and professional opportunities for graduates (DM March 16, 2007, Art. 3, paragraph 7) can be found in: 
Agri-Food Companies
Within agri-food companies, the LM-61 graduate has the skills to:
- Evaluate the nutritional characteristics of raw materials, food products, functional foods, additives and food supplements and bioavailability of nutrients and bioactive compounds
- Evaluate the relationship between food and health
Food Control Laboratories with skills regarding:
- Control of food processing and distribution chains
- Evaluation of food safety
Bodies responsible for labelling, nutritional indications of food and formulation of health claims
Collective Catering Companies
Public and private healthcare with the following skills
- Evaluation of nutritional status, eating habits, and nutritional needs in individuals in different stages and conditions of life and in population groups
- Nutrition and health: nutritional interventions for the prevention of diseases at the population and individual level. Collaboration with other professionals in the management of nutritional aspects of specific pathologies (e.g. eating disorders, malnutrition in the elderly, etc.)
Nutritional Education
Nutrition And Sport/Physical Activity
School Teaching
Research Institutes
As Freelancers for the development of personalized nutritional programs and food education interventions aimed at well-being and maintaining health
Also possessing the skills to verify the correct intake of foods to achieve optimal levels of nutrients and to maintain health at the level of groups and individuals, the graduate will be able to design and conduct activities of food education, training and scientific dissemination.
---------
Final examination features
The final examination consists of the public discussion, in front of a board of professors, of a written dissertation, prepared by the student, about an original experimental research activity, carried out at Universities, Research Centres, Hospitals, Local healthcare Agencies or other private facilities under specific agreements with the University of Palermo, or based on bibliographical research.
The final examination aims at completing the educational path, enabling students to improve their skills, knowledge, ability to apply knowledge, development of relational skills, communication skills and autonomy of judgment in the field of issues related to Human Feeding and Nutrition Sciences.
---------
