Academic year 2024/2025
Bachelor's Degree (BSc) on NURSING
Curriculum: NURSING (QUALIFYING FOR THE PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE) - TRAPANI
For more information visit http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=2030
---------
Class of Bachelor's Degree (BSc) on Nursing and midwifery (L/SNT1)
Duration 3 years
Location TRAPANI
Number of seats in national planning: 75
Department of Health promotion, maternal-child, excellence internal and specialist medicine “G.D’Alessandro”
Course Code 2266
---------
Educational objectives
Graduates of this class possess sound groundings in core subjects, enabling them to better understand the most important element underlying the physiological and pathological processes towards which their preventive and therapeutic action is directed, as well as to reach the best possible integration with other health professions.  
They should also be able to use at least one European Union language, besides Italian, in their professional field and to exchange general information. 
The theoretical and practical education, including also behavioural and deontological skills ensures, at the end of the course, full command of all needed skills as well as their immediate expendability in professional contexts.
Practical educational activities and clinical practice are particularly important; they are coordinated by a teacher of the course. 
The specific educational objectives of this course are:
1.   providing students with the competences needed to understand biological and physiological phenomena underlying the normal functioning of man in the various evolutional phases;
2.  Providing the competences needed to understand etiopathogenesis, physiopathology, clinical-.instrumental diagnostics of human pathology, in the various evolutional phases;
3.  Providing theoretical and technical practical skills for the prevention of the principal human pathologies;
4.  Providing theoretical and technical practical skills for carrying out the tasks related to the professional activity; 
5.  Providing adequate theoretical and technical practical skills in the field of Forensic Medicine, Bioethics and professional ethics, as well as of business management.
---------
Professional opportunities
Nurses carry out their professional activities in public or private healthcare facilities, for the community and in home care, as employees or freelance; they contribute to the training of support staff and take care of their personal professional and research upgrading. They may continue their studies with the 2nd cycle degree in Nursing and Midwifery Sciences.
---------
Final examination features
As per article 11, comma 3-d of DM 2070/2004, to be admitted to the final examination, students should have acquired 174 credits. The degree in Nursing is awarded after passing a final examination consisting of the writing and discussion of a written paper about a theoretical- practical issue. The final examination includes a professional examination, qualifying for the profession, where candidates should demonstrate they possess the practical nursing skills; this examination may be carried out with actual patients or through simulations. Final papers might also be written in a previously agreed foreign language. The final examination is valid as national qualification examination.
---------
