Academic year 2024/2025
Master's Degree (MSc) on ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGIES
Curriculum: ENVIRONMENT SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGIES
For more information visit http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=2717
---------
Class of Master's Degree (MSc) on Environmental and land sciences  (LM-75)
Duration 2 years
Location PALERMO
Free access
Department of Earth and sea sciences
Course Code 2324
---------
Educational objectives
Graduates of the second cycle degree course must possess the following skills:
-	Ability to analyse, control and manage complex environments.
-	Sound cultural background oriented to the environmental system and knowledge of the scientific method.
-	Ability to identify, evaluate and manage interactions among system components and the various factors affecting environmental processes and problems.
-	Knowledge and development of territorial surveying methods and techniques and data analysis, including integration at different scales.
-	Familiarity with the methodologies and technologies for environmental prevention, cleaning and recovery, as well as for human and environmental protection.
-	Ability to face the challenges of environmental and territorial monitoring, control and management, through evaluations based upon criteria of sustainability and environmental ethics.
-	Expertise in the evaluation of resources and environmental impact, also through the models and tools provided by economy, law and social and environmental communication.
The main professional prospects for the 2nd cycle graduates include:
-	Analysis and management of environmental resources and systems and of the territory.
-	Interventions aiming at producing goods and services to improve environmental quality.
-	Environmental quality evaluation and planning of sustainable development activities.
-	Promotion and coordination of initiatives aiming at orienting environmental policies and involving citizens in the solution of territorial problems.
-	Planning and management of actions of environmental recovery, monitoring and control promoted by public administrations, and public and private systems.
-	Implementation and evaluation of environmental impact analyses, strategic evaluation and management of environmental hazard and safety.
-	Production and certification of environmental management systems.
-	Dissemination of environmental culture through educational and promotional activities.
The acquisition of the skills and knowledge needed to achieve the general objectives is obtained through the integrated knowledge of the physical, mathematical, biological, chemical, ecological, earth sciences and juridical-economic-evaluation subjects.
Educational activities consist of lectures, laboratory and field exercises, specialist seminars.
---------
Professional opportunities
Profile:
Senior technician for the management and monitoring of environmental systems
Functions:
intervenes on the production of goods, services and methodologies aimed at improving environmental quality; plans and manages environmental remediation, monitoring and control interventions.
Skills:
evaluates and designs environmental impact, strategic assessment and environmental risk studies; develops methods and techniques of investigation in the territory; knows experimental data analysis methods and techniques.
Career opportunities:
Central Public Administrations, such as the Ministries of the Environment, Health, Cultural Heritage and Activities, Infrastructure, University and Scientific and Technological Research; Local administrations such as Regions, Provinces, Municipalities and ARPA; Private companies
Profile:
Senior technician expert in safety and environmental protection
Functions:
It deals with environmental pollution in the environmental sampling and analysis phases, using adequate instrumentation and processes the results obtained.
Evaluates and designs strategic assessment and environmental risk studies.
It has an active role in the environmental certification of processes and products.
Develops and implements policies and procedures for sustainable resource management.
Participates in the drafting of environmental management plans.
Develops reports and documentation for obtaining environmental permits.
He is involved in eco-design and eco-innovation projects.
Collaborates with research institutes and non-governmental organizations to promote sustainable practices.
Control of compliance with legislation relating to environmental protection.
It promotes public initiatives aimed at preventing environmental damage and spreads the public culture of sustainability.
Skills:
Use of territorial information systems.
Design, illustration and interpretation of field and laboratory activities, selecting the most appropriate data processing, analysis and synthesis procedures, aimed at assessing safety and environmental protection.
Use of prevention, depollution and remediation methodologies and technologies for the protection of man and the environment.
Career opportunities:
Central Public Administrations, such as the Ministries of the Environment, Health, Cultural Heritage and Activities, Infrastructure, University and Scientific and Technological Research; Local administrations such as Regions, Provinces, Municipalities and ARPA; Private companies
Profile:
Freelancer: Biologist (section A) ISTAT code 2.3.1.1.1
Functions:
Consultancy and technical support in environmental conservation projects.
Natural habitat assessment and species identification.
Analysis of environmental impacts for territorial development projects.
Ecological monitoring and management of natural resources.
Design and management of interventions for the protection of biodiversity.
Development of environmental feasibility studies for companies and institutions.
Creation of courses and workshops on biology and ecology.
Skills:
In-depth knowledge of ecosystems, biodiversity and species biology.
Analytical ability for the interpretation of biological and environmental data.
Skills in drafting technical reports and projects.
Communication skills for scientific consultancy and dissemination.
Knowledge of environmental regulations and environmental impact assessment procedures.
Networking and client management skills.
Entrepreneurial skills for managing your own professional business.
Career opportunities:
Environmental consultancy firm.
Collaboration with architects and engineers for sustainable design.
Expert in environmental assessment and monitoring for public and private bodies.
Teaching and training in the environmental sector.
Drafting of environmental impact studies for large infrastructure projects.
Creation of startups in the biotechnology or nature conservation sector.
Profile:
Freelancer: Geologist (section A) ISTAT code 2.1.1.4.1
Functions:
Geological consultancy for civil and environmental engineering projects.
Analysis of the territory and geological resources for territorial planning purposes.
Geological and hydrogeological risk assessment.
Research and exploration of natural resources such as oil, gas, and minerals.
Monitoring and remediation of polluted sites.
Technical support for geology applied to archeology and geothermal energy.
Preparation of appraisals and technical reports.
Skills:
Knowledge of geology, stratigraphy and tectonics.
Ability to interpret geological maps and geophysical data.
Skill in collecting and analyzing geological samples.
Skills in geological modeling and simulation software.
Ability to manage complex projects and resolve technical problems.
Knowledge of safety and environmental regulations.
Communication and customer relationship skills.
Career opportunities:
Geological and engineering consultancy firm.
Collaboration with engineering firms for the design of public and private works.
Expert in the remediation and redevelopment of polluted industrial sites.
Consultant for research and extraction of natural resources.
Starting business activities in the geological and environmental services sector.
Profile:
Researcher at research bodies and institutes
Functions:
carry out original research in the field of environmental sciences
Skills:
knowledge of the scientific method; ability to approach environmental issues with a multidisciplinary approach; perception of the complex, dynamic and interactive structure of the environmental system.
Career opportunities:
become involved in research at universities, CNR, ENEA, etc. through participation in PhD courses in different scientific fields (biology, geology, chemistry)
Profile:
Freelance profession: Agronomist (section A) ISTAT code 2.3.1.3.0
Functions:
Agronomists provide advice to farmers on optimal cultivation practices, soil management, irrigation techniques, use of fertilizers and pesticides, as well as on plant varieties best suited to different environmental conditions.
They collaborate in the design of sustainable cultivation systems, crop rotation plans and planning of new agricultural areas.
They conduct research to develop new agricultural techniques, improve crop yields, increase resistance to disease and adverse climate conditions, and reduce the environmental impact of agricultural practices.
They deal with the conservation and sustainable management of soil, water and biodiversity, promoting agricultural practices that preserve local ecosystems.
They monitor soil and crop conditions, analyze data to identify any problems and evaluate the effectiveness of the agricultural practices adopted.
Skills:
Must have a solid understanding of plant biology, soil chemistry, agricultural meteorology, and other scientific principles fundamental to agriculture.
Must be able to analyze data and information to evaluate soil and crop conditions, identify problems and propose effective solutions.
Must be familiar with modern agricultural practices, including the use of agricultural machinery, irrigation, pesticide and fertilizer management, as well as integrated crop management techniques.
Must be able to communicate clearly and effectively with farmers, researchers, policy makers and other stakeholders, both verbally and in writing.
Must be able to creatively address and solve problems that may arise in agriculture, adapting solutions to specific local conditions.
Must have a strong environmental awareness and commitment to sustainability, seeking to promote agricultural practices that are economically profitable, socially responsible and environmentally friendly.
Must be able to work collaboratively with other agricultural professionals and with farmers themselves, coordinating activities and motivating people towards common objectives, including in areas of international cooperation.
Career opportunities:
The professional figure will carry out consultancy at private companies producing technologies for agriculture and feed; at companies and public organizations and certification bodies, also in a context of international cooperation.
Profile:
Environmental Expert for Sustainability
Functions:
Developing and implementing environmental sustainability strategies for organizations, businesses, government agencies or communities.
Evaluation of the environmental impacts of human activities and industrial practices.
Identification of innovative solutions to reduce environmental impact, such as energy efficiency, sustainable use of natural resources and waste management.
Monitoring and reporting on the effectiveness of the environmental sustainability measures adopted.
Stakeholder involvement and awareness raising on environmental sustainability.
Research and development of new technologies and methodologies to promote environmental sustainability.
Collaboration with multidisciplinary teams to integrate environmental sustainability into business decisions and public policies.
Skills:
In-depth knowledge of global environmental issues, including climate change, biodiversity loss, pollution and natural resource management.
Analytical skills to evaluate the environmental impact of human activities and develop appropriate solutions.
Expertise in the field of renewable energy, energy efficiency, waste management and water conservation.
Excellent communication skills to convey complex concepts clearly and persuasively to diverse audiences.
Leadership and change management skills to drive the adoption of sustainable practices within organisations.
Teamwork orientation and ability to collaborate effectively with professionals from different disciplines.
Research and analytical skills to maintain current knowledge on trends and best practices in the field of environmental sustainability.
Career opportunities:
Private companies in every sector, from manufacturing to financial services, are increasingly seeking sustainability experts to improve their business practices and respond to consumer and environmental regulatory pressures.
Governments at the international, national, regional and local levels hire sustainability experts to develop public policies, environmental regulations and awareness programs.
Environmental NGOs, research institutes and other non-profit organizations offer opportunities to work on conservation, environmental education and advocacy projects.
Sustainability experts can work as independent consultants offering consultancy services, assessment of environmental impacts and development of sustainability strategies for a wide range of clients.
Profile:
Public Engagement Expert
Functions:
It facilitates active and informed public involvement in environmental and sustainability issues, both locally and globally.
It organizes and manages meetings, workshops, events and educational campaigns to raise public awareness on environmental issues and promote sustainable behaviour.
Collaborates with local communities, institutions, non-governmental organizations and the private sector to encourage public participation in the planning and implementation of environmental projects.
Skills:
In-depth knowledge of environmental science and sustainable technologies to effectively and accurately communicate scientific concepts to the public.
Ability to develop engaging communication strategies adapted to the target audience, using multimedia tools, social media and other online platforms.
Ability to facilitate dialogue between stakeholders with different interests, managing conflicts and promoting consensus building around environmental issues.
Career opportunities:
Non-governmental organizations and environmental associations that promote public participation and environmental awareness.
Government agencies and international institutions working in the field of sustainability and environmental management.
Private companies active in the environmental and sustainability sector, including those operating in environmental consultancy and corporate social responsibility.
Research institutes and academic institutions that conduct scientific and participatory communication studies and projects in the environmental field.
Independent consultancy in the field of environmental communication and public participation.
---------
Final examination features
The final examination consists of the elaboration of an original written thesis consistent with the objectives of the course. The thesis work is carried out in cooperation with the bodies and companies associated to the Course steering committee, under the guidance of a Professor of the course and of its presentation and discussion take place before the Degree Board.
The characteristics of the final examinations are described in the Course Educational Regulations.
---------
