Academic year 2024/2025
Master's Degree (MSc) on LAW
Curriculum: LAW (PALERMO) - PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AND SUPRANATIONAL INSTITUTIONS CURRICULUM
For more information visit http://www.unipa.it/struttura.html?id=2775
---------
Class of Master's Degree (MSc) on Law (LMG/01)
Duration 5 years
Location PALERMO
Free access
Department of Law
Double Degree with Universitat de Girona, Girona (SPAIN)
Course Code 2328
---------
Educational objectives
The educational objectives characterizing the Degree in Law (LMG01) are pursued through a training path in which the student will be able to acquire an interpretative methodology suitable for understanding the socio-economic reality, and its evolutionary processes, to acquire the ability to apply knowledge and legal skills to concrete cases, as well as to use updating tools.
At the end of the five-year period, graduates in Law must possess basic and advanced knowledge of the main substantive and procedural legal institutions of national, European and international law; understand the diachronic evolution of legal institutions through the study of Roman law and the history of law, as well as the philosophical foundations of the system; be able to analyse with a critical approach the problems of interpretation and application of substantive and procedural law, as well as to identify, understand and evaluate doctrinal and jurisprudential solutions; understand the dialectic among the internal, national and European legal systems; be able to identify the judicial and extrajudicial protection tools that can be used in the various branches of the legal system (civil, criminal, administrative, tax, supranational ...) and their functioning, with awareness of the institutional context of reference (judicial system, European and international courts, arbitration, alternative dispute resolution ...).
Graduates in Law will acquire the specialized language of legal disciplines and the ability to use it in written and oral form; the ability to use the IT tools which are essential for the practice of legal professions; the ability to study and understand legal texts written in a foreign language, as well as to carry out regulatory and jurisprudence research on databases.
The single-cycle degree course in Law (LMG01), moreover, enables graduates to acquire innovative knowledge through multidisciplinary and practical activities: students will use updated teaching materials to solve interpretative questions, are preliminary to pure research as well as to the practice of legal professions and, more generally, to carry out their professional activity performed in private entities and public administrations.
The degree course lasts five years. In the first year, basic training activities are provided, relating to private law (IUS/01), constitutional law (IUS/08), legal – historical (IUS/18 and IUS/19), and philosophical-legal (IUS/20) subjects; the teaching “Information Literacy”, providing the skills necessary for the use of available information resources, an economic teaching (SECS-P/01), and a foreign language course to be chosen between Legal English and Legal Spanish. In the second year, private law (IUS/07 and IUS/04) and public law (IUS/11) courses are planned. In 3rd and 4th year, the course provides other basic activities (IUS/01, IUS/18, IUS/19), class-specific activities (IUS/04, IUS/14 and IUS/17, IUS/10, IUS/15, IUS/16) and internships. 
In the fifth year, students will be able to characterize their path with civil, criminal and administrative subjects, with a wide choice of optional subjects also in English.
---------
Professional opportunities
Profile:
Jurist
Functions:
The characteristic of 2nd cycle graduates in Law is the possession of general knowledge, skills and application abilities, enabling them to move and orient effectively in the direction of subsequent specialized professional training in any area of positive law, also responding to the demand from companies. Likewise, the jurist is equipped with all the elements necessary to continue studies in any area of scientific research in the legal sector.
Skills:
Graduates in Law must:
- know how to use case-based tools and methods, demonstrating adequate skills in the study, evaluation and analysis of principles, institutions and models of internal and supranational positive law. All this on the basis of the historical knowledge acquired, necessary for the understanding of legal institutions, in their process of evolution and transformation, for a contextualized evaluation of the same.
- knowing how to draft legal texts, of a normative, procedural, negotiation type in a general sense, which are clear and comprehensible in terms of language and pertinent and adequate in terms of effectiveness in the various sectors involved. This also through the support of IT tools.
- applying the techniques of interpretation of the law and analysis of individual cases, of argumentation and representation for the solution of interpretative and applicative problems of the regulatory provisions to specific cases.
- knowing how to deepen, update and requalify personal knowledge and skills, with a view to a lifelong training path.
Professional opportunities:
Jurists are traditionally placed in the employment sector of the legal professions, the judiciary and the notary, with the additional possibility of using their skills and abilities in the professional roles of high-level national, supranational and foreign public companies and institutions.
In addition to the traditional employment opportunities of the Law degree, graduates can aspire to find employment in international organizations, with reference to the roles of legal experts in public bodies and managers of humanitarian, cultural, scientific associations of national or supranational interest, given the specific international orientation of the degree course.
---------
Final examination features
To obtain the 2nd cycle Degree in Law, the student must write an original thesis under the guidance of a supervisor, representing a moment of understanding and application to reality of a series of tools and techniques learned over the five-year period.
The thesis must be discussed publicly during the session of a special Board.
Through the final exam, students demonstrate their ability to argue, with adequate technical-specialist terminology, an original and motivated thesis and to support it in the face of any objections, demonstrating autonomy of judgment, communication and autonomous learning.
---------
